Page: 
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/
Title: About the College of Nurses of Ontario

The nursing profession has been self-regulating in Ontario since 1963. Self-regulation is a privilege granted to professions that have shown they can put the interests of the public ahead of their own professional interests. It recognizes that Ontario’s nurses have the knowledge and expertise to regulate themselves as individual practitioners and to regulate their profession through the College.

The College fulfils its role by:

establishing requirements for entry to practicearticulating and promoting practice standardsadministering its Quality Assurance Programenforcing standards of practice and conduct

The College also supports the regulation of nursing in the public interest by:

participating in the legislative processsharing statistical information about Ontario’s nurses

The College works in partnership with employers, educators and government so that everyone in Ontario benefits from quality nursing services.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Achieving our Purpose
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/mission-vision/
Title: Achieving our purpose



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Regulation, Legislation & By-Laws
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/regulation-and-legislation/
Title: Regulation, Legislation & By-Laws

The College develops and implements policies and changes to its nursing legislation with the goal of protecting the public interest through the regulation of nursing practice.

Policy development involves identifying trends or issues that may have an impact on nursing regulation. Newgovernment legislation, direction from Council, and other external factors can play a role in helping the College identify and shape its policies. These policies in turn shape the College’sby-laws.

By-LawsThe College’s by-laws are the rules that govern how the College operates. Government legislation authorizes Council to make by-laws related to the College's governance, administration and regulatory functions.Legislation Governing NursingThe Nursing Act, 1991 and the Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991 determine how the nursing profession is regulated in Ontario.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: By-Laws
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/regulation-and-legislation/by-laws/
Title: By-Laws

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Legislation Governing Nursing
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/regulation-and-legislation/legislation-governing-nursing/
Title: Legislation Governing Nursing

TheNursing Act, 1991and theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991determine how the nursing profession is regulated in Ontario.

TheNursing Act, 1991contains a scope of practice statement and controlled acts authorized to nursing, as well as provisions and regulations specific to the nursing profession. It includes definitions of the classes of nurse registration, entry-to-practice and title protection regulations, and regulations on initiating controlled acts.

TheRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991contains provisions regarding permitted actions and processes that are applicable to all regulated health professionals in Ontario.

Ontario Regulation 275/94: GeneralOntario Regulation 799/93: Professional MisconductOntario Regulation 196/23: Exemption – Restricted TitlesAn Introduction to theNursing Act, 1991(Fact Sheet)

Ontario Regulation 39/02: Certificates of AuthorizationOntario Regulation 107/96: Controlled ActsOntario Regulation 59/94: Funding for Therapy for Patients Sexually Abused by MembersOntario Regulation 262/18: Prescribed Offences - Health Professions Procedural CodeOntario Regulation 261/18: Information Prescribed Under Subsection 23 (2) of the Health Professions Procedural CodeOntario Regulation 260/18: Patient Criteria Under Subsection 1 (6) of the Health Professions Procedural CodeOntario Regulation 508/22: Registration RequirementsOntario Regulation 201/23: Use of Doctor Title

NP Diagnostic and Prescriptive AuthorityScope of Practice

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Leadership Team
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/president-and-executive-team/
Title: Leadership Team

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Council & Committees
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/
Title: Council & Committees

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Council
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/
Title: Council

The College’s Council sets the direction for the regulation of the nursing profession in Ontario.

Council establishes the goals, objectives and policies of the College according to the governing legislation.

Decisions are made in the public interest with an understanding of the profession and the different settings in which nurses practise.

Council is composed of 14 to 18 public members, 14 RNs and 7 RPNs. Nurses from across the province are elected to Council by their fellow College members, while public members are appointed by the provincial government.

For more information about Council, or to contact a Council member, pleasecontact us.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Learn about CNO’s Council
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/learn-about-cno-council/
Title: Learn about CNO’s Council

Serving on CNO’s Council (our board of directors) is an awesome responsibility, a great experience and a significant commitment.

To determine if serving on Council is right for you, first watch this playlist of six videos. They include reflections based on four common scenarios that a Council member may encounter.



If you are thinking about serving on CNO’s Council, you should reflect on theboard’s profile, the Councilcode of conductand the information below to help you decide if serving on CNO’s board is right for you.

Currently, Council meets quarterly and Council members also serve on one or more statutory committees. However, this could potentially change as we have proposed amajor transformation to CNO’s governance model.

In the meantime, you should plan to meet the current total time commitment of 1 to 3 days per month to prepare for and attend committee meetings, plus the time needed to meet with Council four times a year. Your total time commitment will depend on the committee on which you serve. It is prudent to confirm your employer’s support of your participation.

You will receive a stipend for your time; this is strictly a compensation for time spent on board-related work, not a salary replacement.

Begin your application process

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Council Meetings
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/council-meetings/
Title: Council meetings

Wednesday and Thursday, June 5 and 6, 2024Wednesday and Thursday, Sept. 25 and 26, 2024Wednesday and Thursday, Dec. 4 and 5, 2024

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Council Members
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/council-members/
Title: Council Members

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Governance Principles
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/governance-principles/
Title: Governance Principles

Council is individually and collectively committed toregulating in the public interestin accordance with the following principles:

We make decisions in the public interestWe are responsible for our actions and processesWe meet our legal and fiduciary duties as directors

We anticipate and respond to changing expectations and emerging trendsWe address emerging risks and opportunitiesWe anticipate and embrace opportunities for regulatory and governance innovation

We make evidence-informed decisionsWe seek external expertise where neededWe evaluate our individual and collective knowledge and skills in order to continuously improve our governance performance

Our decisions reflect diverse knowledge, perspectives, experiences and needsWe seek varied stakeholder input to inform our decisions

Our decisions address public interest as our paramount responsibilityOur decisions are free of bias and special interest perspectives

We participate actively and honestly in decision making through respectful dialogueWe foster a culture in which we say and do the right thingWe build trust by acting ethically and following our governance principles

Our processes, decisions and the rationale for our decisions are accessible to the publicWe communicate in a way that allows the public to evaluate the effectiveness of our governance

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Governance Vision
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/governance-vision-2020/
Title: Governance Vision

Leading in Regulatory Governance

Our ability to protect the public starts at the top. This is why Council conducted a top-to-bottom review of its governance operations and structure. Council did this to make sure it was keeping pace with the public’s changing needs.

Councilis the College’s governing body and sets the strategic direction for regulating nursing in the public interest. Both elected nurses and government-appointed members of the public sit on Council.

In addition to Council, the College has a number ofcommitteesthat make decisions related to our public protection mandate. These include committees that focus on: complaints from the public,discipline,fitness to practise,quality assuranceandregistration, and provide advice aboutfinancialmatters.

What the public needs and expects from its regulators is always evolving. Therefore, our governing body must also continually evolve to best serve the public.

In 2014, Council took a bold step forward and invited an external task force to review all aspects of its governance — from the basics of how Council is formed, to how it operates. Council wanted a proactive, objective, expert and evidence-informed review that was completely centred on public trust.

The task force reviewed global governance trends, best practices and expert advice. It also shared how to apply these to the College’s governance. We published the findings and recommendations in a report calledFinal Report: A vision for the future.At its December 2016 meeting, the College’s Council approved this vision for governance.

At the March & June 2017 meetings, Council established a working group of five Council members to work with Council in developing a plan for implementing the governance vision. This included a plan for achieving the needed legislative change. The working group has been assisting Council to identify and implement advancements that can occur before legislative change.

Here are a few summarized highlights of just a few elements:

Council's size and shapeCurrently, Council has 37 members, including 21 nurses and 16 members of the public. The future board (which will no longer be called Council) will have 12 members, and there will be an equal number of nurses and public members.

Why?Members of the public have an important part to play on our board. We also need nursing expertise to succeed. The new model will provide that balance and reflect the board’s commitment to the public.

Multiple pieces of evidence say the same thing: smaller boards are more effective in making decisions. Large boards are generally more bureaucratic and less flexible. It's easier for members to share ideas in a smaller board.

Board appointmentsBoard members who are nurses will no longer be volunteers who are elected by their peers. Instead, they will be appointed based on specific attributes and competencies — their experience, knowledge, and skill.

Why?The decision to move from elections to appointments was a serious one. Ultimately, it was based on two things. First, elections create the potential for misunderstanding, because nurses elected to the governing body do not serve those that elected them — they serve the public. Second, appointments based on competencies ensure that the board is comprised of a diverse group of people with a wide range of expertise, skills, extensive knowledge and different perspectives.

Advisory groupsUnder the new model, the board will create advisory groups as needed to help promote decision-making from a diverse range of perspectives.Why?Advisory groups will bring yet another layer of expertise and knowledge to the board. They may be comprised of members of the public, various industry experts and nurses with expertise in specific areas such as mental health or remote nursing.

EvaluationEvery three years, an external expert will evaluate the board and its governance processes. The findings will be public.

Why?Our board wants to be a world leader in governance excellence. To do this, it needs to evaluate itself regularly so it can continuously improve. Evaluation also holds the governing body accountable to the public.

In September 2017, Council approved the milestones for implementing the vision. We’re going to pilot-test a new process for appointing 2019 statutory committee members. This involves defining what our committees will require and developing new educational resources about the College’s governance.

Later this year, nurses who are interested in applying to a committee can use the new competencies and resources.

Over the next two years, we will be providing regular updates about the progress. We encourage you to monitor developments, especially if you’ve ever been interested in serving on Council or a committee. Look for updates in this section and inThe Standard.

To support the ongoing dialogue about the future of regulatory governance in Ontario and beyond, the College is making available the governance principles, vision, task force reports and supporting documents used to develop this vision:

Governance PrinciplesSummary and milestonesFinal Report: A vision for the futureGovernance literature reviewTrends in regulatory governanceJurisdictional Survey Summary ReportRead about the changes we proposed to the Ontario government to protect the public.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Proposing change to protect the public
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/governance-vision-2020/proposing-change-to-protect-the-public/
Title: Proposing change to protect the public

CNO has a bold, innovative vision to improve its governance. Vision 2020 will strengthen our protection of the public and enhance public trust in nursing regulation. CNO has submitted its vision for change to the Ontario government and requested the government make the legislative amendments needed for this improved model of governance. Together, we can advance regulatory excellence in Ontario.

Read about the changes we proposed to the Ontario government to protect the public.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Board Profile
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/governance-vision-2020/board-profile/
Title: Board Profile

The Board Profile describes the responsibilities of the board, the governance principles members of the Board commit to, and the competencies and attributes members of the board should reflect on when running for election.

While ourGovernance Visionneeds legislative change to be fully implemented, Council has put into action elements of the vision where it can, including the governance principles and askingfutureandcurrentmembers of the board to reflect on the competencies and attributes they bring to the board.

Governs the regulation of Ontario's nursing profession in the public interest.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Governance Video
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/council/governance-vision-2020/watch-how-were-leading-in-governance/
Title: Governance Video

Watch how we’re leading in governance.

The College exists for one purpose: to protect the public. Current evidence tells us there are better ways of achieving this, so we’re doing it.

Our modern approach to governing puts people first. But governance is not an easy topic to understand, so we captured the key points in a short video.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Committees
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/
Title: Committees

In addition to Council, CNO also has statutory committees as described in the legislation, standing committees and may appoint ad hoc committees. Committees are composed of Council and non-Council members.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Learn about CNO Committees
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/committee-application/
Title: Learn about CNO Committees

You can make a difference by joining a CNO committee. It is an opportunity for nurses to contribute to regulatory processes that protect patients.

Every year, we invite RPNs, RNs and NPs to apply to participate in any of CNO’s five committees.

If you are considering getting involved, these educational videos will help you decide if committee work is right for you. This playlist of six videos will take about 15 minutes to watch.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Discipline Committee
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/discipline-committee/
Title: Discipline Committee

Discipline Committeehearingsare held in cases where an RN, RPN or NP has been referred by theInquiries, Complaints and Reports Committeebecause of the serious nature of the alleged professional misconduct and/or incompetence.

A discipline hearing is a formal legal process. A panel of the committee listens to evidence about a nurse’s practice and/or conduct and makes a decision about whether to dismiss the allegations or find that the nurse has committed professional misconduct or is incompetent.

Witnesses may be called by CNO to testify at a hearing because they have information that CNO believes will assist the panel. Read theInformation for Witnessesdocument for more on what to expect as a witness.

Decision outcomes from the Discipline Committee can include:

an oral reprimandrevocation or suspension of a nurse’s certificate of registrationrestrictions or limitations on a nurse’s certificate of registration (costs, fines, meetings with regulatory expert, independent practice restriction, etc.)education and remedial activitiesthe requirement to notify an employer about the committee’s decisionemployer audits of the nurse’s practice (For example charting practices to ensure they are in line with theDocumentation, Revised 2008practice standard.)

In most cases, the Discipline Committee’s order requires the nurse to inform his or her employer(s) about its decision. If a nurse's certificate is revoked, the person may not use the title RN, RPN or NP, hold herself or himself out as a nurse in providing service, or undertake any controlled act.

Summaries of committee decisions are published in theThe Standard,and onCanLII Connects; a Canadian legal database of case commentaries and summaries. Decisions are also added to the nurse’s profile on the CNO’s public register,Find a Nurse, indefinitely.

The Discipline Committee has establishedrulesandguidelinesthat govern the hearings process. Discipline hearings are generally open to the public.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Executive (Patient Relations) Committee
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/executive-committee/
Title: Executive (Patient Relations) Committee

The Executive Committee provides leadership to Council, facilitates the efficient and effective functioning of Council and committees, fulfils the statutory role of the Patient Relations Committee, and makes decisions between Council meetings.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Finance Committee
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/finance-committee/
Title: Finance Committee

The Finance Committee advises Council on the financial affairs of the College, recommends fiscal policies (including by-laws related to financial matters) to Council, and monitors the implementation of fiscal policies.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Fitness to Practise Committee
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/fitness-to-practise-committee/
Title: Fitness to Practise Committee

The Fitness to Practise Committee determines whether a nurse is incapacitated, and if so, what action may be necessary to protect the public.

According to the law, incapacitated means that a nurse is “suffering from a physical or mental condition or disorder that makes it desirable in the interest of the public that the member’s certificate of registration be subject to terms, conditions or limitations, or that the member no longer be permitted to practise.”1

If a nurse is found to be incapacitated, the committee can revoke or suspend their certificate of registration (for an indefinite period of time), or have specific terms, conditions or limitations attached to it.

Referrals to the committee can be resolved with a hearing, or with an agreement (also known as an undertaking) where the nurse formally agrees to comply with appropriate medical treatment and/or practice in accordance with specified terms.

Fitness to Practise hearings are closed to the public and Committee decisions are not published. However, a note will be added on CNO’s public register,Find a Nurse, to indicate if the nurse is allowed to practice, and if so, what restrictions are in place to protect the public.

The Fitness to Practise Committee has establishedrules and practice directionsthat govern the hearings process.

1Refer to Section 1(1) of theHealth Professions Procedural Codeof theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Inquiries, Complaints and Reports Committee
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/inquiries-complaints-and-reports-committee/
Title: Inquiries, Complaints and Reports Committee

The Inquiries, Complaints and Reports Committee screens matters related to public complaints or information CNO receives through reports. The committee reviews written materials and determines whether a hearing is required or if some other action, such as remediation and/or a verbal caution, would address the public interest.

The committee may require a nurse to complete an education andremediation program, or may issue a verbal caution. If a caution is required, the nurse must appear before the committee to hear concerns and receive advice about their practice.

The goal of both the remediation program and the caution is to improve the nurse’s practice through education. They are not disciplinary in nature and do not impose practice restrictions on the nurses certificate of registration. It is a chance for the nurse to reflect on the issues investigated and ensure they are practising according to the standards going forward. Details of a nurse’s remediation program and/or caution are posted on CNO’s public register,Find a Nurse.

At any time following the receipt of a complaint or the appointment of an investigator, the committee has the authority to impose an interim suspension or terms, conditions or limitations on a nurse’s certificate of registration until the matter is settled.

Depending on the matter under review, the committee considers the results of a health inquiry or misconduct investigation, or may accept a resolution proposed by the nurse and complainant.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nominating Committee
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/nominating-committee/
Title: Nominating Committee

The Nominating Committee assists the board of directors (Council) with ensuring CNO’s committee members have the competencies and attributes (meaning the experience, knowledge, skills, and character) needed to fulfil their roles and our purpose to protect the public by promoting safe nursing practice.

The Nominating Committee also fulfills specific roles related to the election of board members and the Executive Committee and makes recommendations to the board about candidates for Committee appointments.

Diane Ballantyne, appointed public memberSylvia Douglas, appointed member of CouncilSue Haywood, appointed public memberAisha Jahangir, RN, member of CouncilNaomi Thick, RN, Chair

Nominating Committee Terms of ReferenceNominating Committee Competency Profile

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Quality Assurance Committee
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/quality-assurance-committee/
Title: Quality Assurance Committee

The Quality Assurance Committee is responsible for ensuring that members comply with all aspects of theQuality Assurance Program, including the three types of assessment: self, practice and peer. These components are designed to promote lifelong learning and continuing competence among nurses.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration Committee
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/committee/registration-committee/
Title: Registration Committee

The Registration Committee reviews applications from applicants who want to become members of the College but do not meet one or more of theregistration requirements.

After considering the application and submissions, the Registration Committee may direct the Executive Director to:

issue a certificate of registrationissue a certificate of registration with terms, conditions and limitationsissue a certificate of registration if the applicant completes specified training or additional examsrefuse to issue a certificate of registration.

Orders of the Registration Committee can be appealed to theHealth Professional Appeal and Review Board. An Order of the Review Board can be appealed further to the Divisional Court of Ontario.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Elections & Appointments
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/elections-appointments/
Title: Elections & Appointments

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Council Elections
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/elections-appointments/elections/
Title: Council Elections

Council is CNO’s board of directors, and it’s comprised of nurses and members of the public. Council makes important decisions that shape the regulation of nursing and promote public safety. Together, Council and CNO have one purpose: to protect the public by promoting safe nursing practice.

If you’re passionate about safe client care, then sitting on Council will be a personally and professionally rewarding experience. This is your opportunity to bring your perspective to a diverse group of nurses from all types of positions and settings and members of the public. It’s also a significant accountability.

This year, we’re holding elections in the Southwestern and Central Western electoral districts for NPs, RNs and RPNs, and in Central Toronto for RPNs.

Composed of the counties of Elgin, Essex, Huron, Kent, Lambton, Middlesex, Oxford and Perth.

Two RNs/NPs and one RPN will be elected

Composed of the counties of Brant, Bruce, Grey, Wellington and Dufferin and the regional municipalities of Haldimand-Norfolk, Hamilton-Wentworth, Niagara and Waterloo.

Two RNs/NPs and one RPN will be elected

Composed of the municipality of metropolitan Toronto, the County of Simcoe and the regional municipalities of Halton, Peel and York.

One RPN will be elected

We sent all eligible nurses an email about the election Thursday, Oct. 12, 2023.

If you live and work in different districts, here’s how to find your electoral district.

Send an email toelections@cnomail.org

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Council Member Role Description
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/councils-and-committees/elections-appointments/council-member-role-description/
Title: Council Member Role Description

All Council members make decisions in the public interest, combining this responsibility with an understanding of the profession and the settings in which it is practised. Council is made up of 14 RNs and 7 RPNs elected by their peers through regional elections, and 14 to 18 public members appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. Collectively they are responsible for setting the direction for regulation of the nursing profession under the framework of theRegulated Health Professions Actand theNursing Act.

In performing this function, Council members are expected to:

The term of office for Council members is three years and service is limited to two consecutive terms.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Public consultations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/public-consultations/
Title: Public consultations

Have your say

CNO partners with members of the public to support safe nursing care for everyone in Ontario. One way we do this is by asking you what you think about information we develop.

When we create new resources about nursing practice, or propose changes to practice standards, guidelines and by-laws, we will post them here. We invite you to read them and send us your comments. See below for details and deadlines for submitting feedback.

We consider all comments we receive when we create new materials that support safe nursing care.

There are no public consultations at this time.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Annual Report
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/annual-report/
Title: 2022 Annual Report: Looking Ahead

At its June meeting, Council reviewed the Annual Report and sent it to the Ministry of Health.

For the first time, CNO published its annual report in English and French simultaneously. In past years, CNO released the French-language Annual Report after the English version. This initiative is part of CNO’s commitment to be accountable and transparent in both official languages and better serve Ontarians.

You can read the Annual Reporthere.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: College Performance Measurement Framework
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/cpmf/
Title: College Performance Measurement Framework

In 2020, the Ministry of Health established a new annual reporting requirement for all health regulatory colleges. The College Performance Measurement Framework (CPMF) enables us to measure and report, in a standardized manner, how we are acting in the public interest.

Completing the CPMF is an opportunity for CNO to reflect on our achievements, better understand how we measure up to best practices in regulation and to identify areas of improvement.

The Ministry requires us to report on the following seven domains that relate to how we execute our key statutory functions and serve the public interest:

Under each domain are standards that outline best practices of regulatory excellence. Colleges will update this report annually, noting any progress on areas identified for improvement or adding new or updated information required by the Ministry of Health. After reviewing the reports, the Ministry will provide CNO with performance feedback. These reports are one of the ways colleges demonstrate their commitment to the public interest for the people of Ontario.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Transparency
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/transparency-a-commitment-to-clarity-and-openness/
Title: Transparency: Building an open and accessible College

As part of our public protection mandate, CNO is committed to enhancing transparency. What is meant by this?

CNO’s role is to support the delivery of safe and ethical nursing care to the people of Ontario. Being transparent – or clear, open and forthright – about our processes and decision-making is one way we do this. Transparency also means that our processes and information related to the nursing profession in Ontario can be easily accessed by applicants, the public and nurses.

Find a Nurseis CNO’s register of all nurses in Ontario. Members of the public can access information about nurses, such as a nurse’s category (RN, RPN, NP), employment information and any conduct and practice issues. CNO has authority to post this information throughtheRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991, theregulationsunder that Act and CNO by-laws.

Together with regulatory colleagues on the Advisory Group for Regulatory Excellence (AGRE), CNO developedtransparency principlesas a framework for future decisions related to making more information publically available.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: What is AGRE?
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/transparency-a-commitment-to-clarity-and-openness/what-is-agre/
Title: What is AGRE?

The Advisory Group for Regulatory Excellence (AGRE) was formed in 2012 by the registrars of colleges with a long history of self-regulation and shared expertise in the regulation of professions with scopes of practice that pose significant risk of harm to the public – College of Nurses of Ontario, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario, Royal College of Dental Surgeons of Ontario, and the Ontario College of Pharmacists.

These regulatory leaders identified both an opportunity and an obligation to demonstrate leadership in strengthening current regulatory mechanisms.

Following an invitation to all health regulatory colleges in Ontario, the College of Physiotherapists of Ontario and the College of Optometrists joined the other four as founding members of AGRE.

AGRE's goal is to identify opportunities and make policy recommendations that will strengthen public confidence in self-regulation. This is done through research, debate and policy development. The audiences are the public, government and other regulators who share an interest in regulation in the public interest.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: AGRE: Transparency principles
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/transparency-a-commitment-to-clarity-and-openness/agre-transparency-principles/
Title: AGRE: Transparency principles

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nursing Statistics
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/nursing-demographics/
Title: Nursing Statistics

As the regulatory body for nursing in Ontario, the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) has the most comprehensive information on nurses in the province.

The following are data and related information about CNO’s membership that are available for public use.

To receive email updates on nursing statistics, please subscribe to our newsletter.

Subscribe Now

If you have any questions about statistical information available from CNO or if you are interested in an accessible PDF version or historical reports, pleasecontact us.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nursing Data Dashboard
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/nursing-demographics/nursing-data-dashboard/
Title: Nursing Data Dashboard

The College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) has launched a new Nursing Data Dashboard.

The self-serve dashboard allows users to access CNO data through a reliable, transparent, accessible and easy-to-use portal. The dashboard includes information about registration classes (General, Extended and Non-Practising), demographic data, and employment data, such as areas of practice and working status. You can view nursing trends in Ontario between 2014 and 2023.

At CNO, the privacy of Ontario nurses is paramount and no personal, identifiable information is available through the dashboard.

The dashboard supports CNO’s strategic plan and its initiative to provide insights through a data-driven approach to address impacts occurring in the system.

Visit the Nursing Data Dashboard

If you have any questions, please contact us atstats@cnomail.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registrant Statistics
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/nursing-demographics/registrant-statistics/
Title: Registrant Statistics

This page contains statistics about nurses who are currently registered with the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) as ofDecember 1, 2023.

CNO registers nurses in two categories (Registered Nurse [RN] and Registered Practical Nurse [RPN]) and multiple classes, as shown in the following table:

Any nurse who holds a certificate of registration with CNO is considered a registrant. A registration is specific to a category and class, and registrants may hold more than one registration.

General & Extended Class:Nurses who have met all the requirements to become registered to work as nurses in Ontario are registered in the general class. Registered Nurses in the Extended Class areNurse Practitioners (NPs).

Temporary Class:Nurses in the Temporary Class are allowed to practise under defined terms, conditions and limitations. They are eligible to join the General Class after they meet all the requirements.

Non-Practising Class:Nurses who want to keep their registration when they are not practicing may register in the Non-Practising Class. They cannot practice nursing in Ontario, either paid or unpaid.

Learn more aboutClasses of Registration.



The following graph shows the number of registrants holding registration in the General or Extended Class at the start of each month.

Although the number of registrants in the General and Extended Classes displays an overall upward trend, the numbers follow a cyclical pattern in line with CNO’s Annual Membership Renewal process.

Each year, the number of registrants peaks in December and then falls between January and March as some members choose not to renew their General or Extended Class registration and instead enter the Non-Practising Class, resign their membership or let their registration expire. After March, the number of registrants starts to grow as new nurses join the General and Extended Classes during the year.





Image description

The following graph shows the number of registrants holding registration in the General or Extended Class at the start of eachOctoberfor the previous five years, by the categories and classes of registration they hold. Dual registrants hold registrations in both the RN and RPN categories at the same time. Presenting registrant totals at the same time each year allows for year-over-year comparisons, while accounting for seasonal fluctuations.



Image description

The following table shows the number of registrants in the General and Extended Classes at the start ofDecember 2023and compares it to the same time in the previous year.



Current Registrations in the Extended Class by Specialty as of December 1, 2023

All Registered Nurses in the Extended Class (NPs) have one or more specialty certificates. The following table shows the number of specialty certificates held by NPs as ofDecember1, 2023.





The following graph shows the number of registrants holding registration in the Temporary Class at the start of each month.

The numbers vary greatly throughout the year. They typically peak in July as graduates from Ontario nursing programs register in the Temporary Class while preparing to write the registration exam and complete their General Class application. The spike in 2021 reflects the nurses who applied for the Emergency Assignment Class (EAC), which was activated to support health human resource needs, but were redirected toward the Temporary Class because registration was valid for six months instead of 60 days.

In late 2022, regulation changes to the Temporary Class went into effect to hasten the registration of international applicants. A description of the regulation changes and information on the number of new nurses who entered the system since the regulation changes went into effect can be seen on ourApplicant Statisticswebpage.





Image description



The following graph shows the number of registrants holding registration in the Temporary Class at the start of eachDecemberfor the previous five years, by the categories and classes of registration they hold. Presenting registrant totals at the same time each year allows for year-over-year comparisons, while accounting for seasonal fluctuations.



Image description

The following table shows the number of registrants in the Temporary Class at the start ofDecember 2023and compares it to the same time in the previous year.



The following graph shows the number of registrants holding registration in the Non-Practising Class at the start of each month.

Although the number of registrants in the Non-Practising Class displays an overall upward trend, the numbers follow a cyclical pattern in line with CNO’s Annual Membership Renewal process. As a percentage, Non-Practising registrations make up around 8% of all registrations, as shown in ourRegistration Statistics Report 2022, and has remained relatively stable since 2018.

Each year, the number of registrants in the Non-Practising Class spikes in January and February. This spike mainly consists of nurses who are not able to renew in the General or Extended classes, because they no longer meet the declaration of practice. These members must choose to enter the Non-Practising Class, resign their General or Extended class registration or let it expire.

The number of registrants in the Non-Practising Class falls in March, when nurses who do not wish to renew their Non-Practising registration either resign it or let it expire.





Image description



The following graph shows the number of registrants holding registration in the Non-Practising Class at the start of eachDecemberfor the previous five years, by the categories and classes of registration they hold. Dual Non-Practising registrants hold Non-Practising registrations in both the RN and RPN categories at the same time. Presenting registrant totals at the same time each year allows for year-over-year comparisons, while accounting for seasonal fluctuations.



Image description

The following table shows the number of registrants in the Non-Practising Class at the start ofDecember2023and compares it to the same time in the previous year.

New Registrationsrepresent the number of nurses who registered in a particular category and class of registration for the first time. They may already hold registration with CNO at the time of registration. A nurse registering for the first time as a dual RN/RPN registrant would be counted in the RN General and RPN General Classes.

New Registrations are divided into two types: New Registrants and Additional Registrations.

New Registrantsare nurses who register with CNO for the first time in either the General or Extended Class, regardless of category. They represent new nurses to the system and can only be categorized as a new registrant once in their career. For example, a new graduate who registers with CNO for the first time as an RPN. For any subsequent registration they will not be considered a new registrant*

Additional Registrationsare nurses who were already registered with CNO when they gained a new registration and either a) completed an additional registration in a new category, or b) moved from the General to the Extended class. They represent enhanced capacity to the system, but not new nurses. For example, an RPN that gains additional RN registration or an RN that becomes an NP. In both cases, because the nurse already held CNO registration, they are considered additional registrations as opposed to new registrants.

There is a small number of applicants every year who register as an RN and RPN on the same day. In these cases, if they have no previous CNO registration, their RN registration is categorized as a new registrant, while their RPN is considered the additional registration.

Adding New Registrants and Additional Registrations will give Total New Registrations.



For more data related to our applicants seeking registration, see ourApplicant Statistics.

To learn more about our registration process, see ourRegistration Requirements.The following tables show the number of new registrants and new registrations in each category and class for three date ranges:

The past 12 months fromDecember 1, 2022 to November 30, 2023Year to date (YTD) fromJanuary 1, 2023 to October 31, 2023

The previous month –November 2023



New Registrations by Type

New Registrants by Category and Class



New Registrants by Location of Education



Additional Registrations by Category and Class



Additional Registrations by Location of Education

*Please note the definition was modified in January, 2023. Previously, new registrants were defined as nurses who were not already registered in the General or Extended Class at the time a new registration is granted.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Applicant Statistics
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/nursing-demographics/application-statistics/
Title: Applicant Statistics

The College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) is committed to publicly sharing application and registration data.

The following page contains statistics about the number of applicants currently seeking CNO registration. All applicants who have an active application, who do not currently hold any CNO registration and are residing in Ontario are in the table presented below. These statistics represent the number of new nurses most likely to be immediately available to the system upon registration.

For more data related to our new registrants, see ourRegistrant Statistics.

The following table shows the number of active applicants to the RPN General, RN General and RN Extended classes residing in Ontario without current CNO registration by Application Type, as ofDecember 1, 2023.

CNO has implemented changes to the application process, to facilitate the registration of applicants. The Supervised Practice Experience Partnership (SPEP), a program designed to match international applicants with Ontario nursing employers to help them meet registration requirements, and regulation changes approved by the Ontario government related to the Temporary Class and reinstatement process were put in place to increase the number of qualified nurses available to provide safe patient care in the province.



The regulation amendments to the Temporary Class change the eligibility requirements for applicants to register in the Temporary Class. To be eligible applicants must:

meet all requirements for registration in the General Class, except for the education and registration exam requirementshave completed a nursing education program approved or recognized in any jurisdiction

Nurses can continue to hold their Temporary Class registration if they fail the registration exam once. If they fail a second time, their registration will expire.

In addition to being eligible, applicants must still have an offer of employment from an approved Ontario nursing employer.

The following table shows the total number of applicants, without any other CNO registration, who have met all requirements except the offer of employment for the Temporary Class and the number who registered in the Temporary Class, by Application Type, since the regulation changes came into effect on November 1, 2022. They represent new nurses added to the system.

The data cover the period from November 1, 2022 toDecember 1, 2023.

For more data related to Temporary Class registrants, see ourRegistrant Statistics.



The regulation changes also make it easier for nurses in the Non-Practising Class and retired nurses to reinstate and return to practice by providing CNO’s Executive Director the discretion to reinstate registrants who have not practiced within three years. The following table shows the number of nurses who reinstated their General or Extended Class registration, without any other CNO registration at that time, since the regulation changes came into effect on November 1, 2022.

The data cover the period from November 1, 2022 toDecember1, 2023.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Latest Reports
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/nursing-demographics/statistical-reports/
Title: Latest Reports

This report contains statistics about nurses who renewed for the first time in CNO’s General Class (as RNs or RPNs) and Extended Class (as NPs) between 2015 and 2022.

First-Time Renewals Report 2022

NOTE: These are large reports and may take a few moments to load. Please be patient.



This report identifies the number of additional registrants (nurses) and registrations (categories and classes of nursing) to CNO in 2022 (known as gains), and the number of nurses who did not renew or registrations that were not renewed (losses).

Gains and Losses Report 2022

NOTE: These are large reports and may take a few moments to load. Please be patient.



As part of the registration process, applicants must successfully complete anational registration examination. The following report provides information about the number of applicants who attempted the exams and the number that passed.

Nursing Registration Exams Report 2021

Note: We have revised our Nursing Registration Exams Report 2021. Please refer to this May 17, 2022 version for the most accurate data.



TheRegistration Renewal Statistics Report(formerlyRegistration Statistics Report) presents data on all nurses who renew a certificate of registration with CNO, which includes Registered Nurses (RN), Registered Practical Nurses (RPN) or Nurse Practitioners (NP). This report presents demographic and employment statistics of the nurses who renewed their registrations for 2023 (from November 30, 2022 to March 20, 2023) and compares it to data from the 2016-2022 renewal cycles.

Registration Renewal Statistics Report 2023

Note: We have revised our Registration Renewal Statistics Report 2023. Please refer to this August 09, 2023 version for the most accurate data.

This report presents the number of new registrations in the most recent calendar year and compares it to data from previous years. It also includes information on which categories of nurses were newly registered and where they were trained.

New Registrations Report 2022

NOTE: These are large reports and may take a few moments to load. Please be patient.



If you are interested in an accessible PDF version or historical reports, please contactstats@cnomail.org.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Mailing Address & Data Request Services
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/nursing-demographics/home-mailing-address-list-and-data-request-services/
Title: Mailing Address & Data Request Services

Lists containing the home mailing addresses of CNO members are available to external parties for the following purposesonly:

research in nursinginformation on continuing education opportunitiesinformation from nursing organizations (e.g., unions and professional associations)

Only those members who have consented to the release of their information are included on the mailing list.Lists containing email addresses of CNO members are not available to external parties and will not be released under any circumstance.

To request a home mailing address list, complete theHome Mailing Address List Request Formand submit it to CNO with all necessary documentation. Allow six to eight weeks for processing.

Before making a formal request for data, carefully review CNO's freely available statistical resources. If the information you require is not readily available, complete theData Request Formand submit it with all necessary documentation. Allow six to eight weeks for processing.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Careers at the College
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/careers-at-cno1/
Title: Careers at CNO

Our purpose is to protect the public by promoting safe nursing practice. Just like nurses who uphold CNO’s standards every day, CNO staff are also accountable. Every day CNO staff initiate, innovate and lead new programs tostrengthen patient safetyin our health care system.

View current opportunities

Our more than 300 staff come from different professional backgrounds including nursing, law, policy development, finance, human resources, communications, information technology, customer service, administration and facilities. Everyone at CNO brings something unique to our work and our culture. It’s what makes us successful and working at CNO so rewarding.

We are focused on achieving our purpose and are united by ourcore values: Innovation, Integrity, Collaboration and Wellbeing. We understand that individual success is as diverse as the people who work at CNO and our inclusive and welcoming environment supports everyone’s desire to be successful at work and in life.

Bringing Our Core Values To Life poster

Our office is located at 101 Davenport Road in Toronto, a short walk from the Yorkville shopping district and the Bay Street subway station.

We acknowledge that this land is the traditional territory of many nations including the Mississaugas of the Credit, the Anishnabeg, the Chippewa, the Haudenosaunee and the Wendat peoples.

We offer staff the flexibility to work onsite and virtually through teleworking. Skylights fill CNO’s newly redesigned building with natural light and staff can work in any of the individual or collaborative workspaces throughout the building. Our barrier-free building includes comfort features such as ergonomically designed workstations, bike parking, individual lockers, shower facilities, filtered water stations and a spiritual observance room. Our staff Café is a favourite space for staff to connect, celebrate milestones and enjoy fun events hosted by the Social Committee.

CNO offers a highly competitive compensation program within the broader public sector employment market (health care, post-secondary institutions, municipal and provincial government, other regulators). This includes being transparent about our salary grid and conducting regular comprehensive market surveys to review our benefits and salary ranges. Compensation components include:

extended health, dental, life and disability insurance effective on your first day of employment and premiums are fully paid by CNOcomprehensive wellness program including virtual access to nurse practitioners and physicians, an employee assistance program, and a mental health / wellness program that provides full care from intake through remissionmembership in the Healthcare of Ontario Pension Plan (HOOPP), a multi-employer defined benefit pension plangenerous paid time away policies for vacation, personal, sick and professional development daysopportunities for professional development, including on-site workshops, support for attendance at conferences and seminars, and a tuition reimbursement programopportunity to earn an annual performance-based award of up to 5% of salary or equivalent in additional paid time awayaccess to WorkPerks which offers a wide range of discounts on travel, entertainment and merchandisereimbursement for eligible adjustable height desk, and provision of an ergonomic chair for teleworking; provision of a laptop and peripherals

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Privacy and Terms of Use
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/privacy/
Title: Privacy and Terms of Use

Privacy PolicyHow the College protects the privacy of your personal information in all your dealings with the College.Terms of UseThe conditions under which content on the College's website may or may not be reproduced.eHealth Ontario Notice of CollectionHow eHealth Ontario may use your personal information.Mandatory Member EmailsWhy the College requires email addresses from Members of the College.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Privacy Policy
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/privacy/privacy-code/
Title: CNO Privacy Policy

At the College of Nurses of Ontario (“CNO”), your privacy is of great importance to us. CNO is committed to the protection of the personal information of anyone who shares their information with us. This includes members of the public, current nurse members, past nurse members, nurse applicants, website visitors and other individuals whose personal information is entrusted to CNO.

Please note that this Privacy Policy replaces the former Privacy Code. Where you see the term “Privacy Code”, please refer to this document.

Policy Contents:

CNO takes full responsibility for the protection of personal information, including personal health information it collects. Personal information and personal health information is collected and managed under the general authority of theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991, S.O. 1991, c. 18 (the “RHPA”); theNursing Act, 1991, S.O. 1991, c. 32; their regulations; and CNO’s by-laws. In fulfilling its mandate as a regulatory body, CNO follows the privacy best practice principles contained in the Canadian Standards AssociationModel Code for the Protection of Personal Information, CAN/CSA-Q830-96.

CNO has an appointed Privacy Officer who oversees information handling practices and CNO’s Privacy Office. The Privacy Officer’s duties include:

Developing and reviewing internal procedures to protect personal information;Ensuring all staff are trained on privacy best practices and are aware of the importance of safeguarding any personal information that they are privy to;Ensuring all inquiries and complaints relating to privacy are appropriately handled; andEnsuring the appropriate contractual commitments are in place for third-party service providers with whom CNO shares personal information.

‘Personal information’ is any factual or subjective information, recorded or not, about an identifiable individual. This includes your name, contact information, birth date, educational background, or work history as well as any sensitive information such as financial or health data. Personal information does not include aggregate information that cannot be linked to a specific individual.

Personal health information isIdentifying information about an individual in oral or recorded form that relates to health care, health history, providers, eligibility, payments, or coverage.

Personal Information and personal health information will be referred to as ‘Personal Information’ for the duration of this policy.

CNO collects personal information with your knowledge and consent in several ways, for example:

We collect personal information from members of the public when they inform us of concerns about a nurse’s practice or conduct or submit a ‘Make a Complaint’ form;We collect personal information from nurse members and applicants through application and renewal forms, and member learning plans and assessments.We collect personal information about nurse members and applicants from records provided by third parties. For example, with your authorization, licensing exam providers and educational institutions provide personal information to CNO.

There are instances where CNO has the legal authority to obtain records and collect, use, and disclose personal information and personal health information without consent. For example, we may do this in the course of a professional conduct investigation, or to protect the interests or safety of the public.

We identify when information may be provided optionally and when it is necessary in order to fulfill our obligations as a regulatory health college. Your consent can be withdrawn at any time, subject to legal or contractual restrictions, by providing us with written notice. Upon receipt of a notice to withdraw consent, we will inform you of the consequences of withdrawing your consent, which may include the inability to remain a member of CNO.

To fulfill our mandate and duties under theRHPA,we use personal information for the following purposes:

To maintain the public register: The “Find a Nurse” service is available to the public athttps://registry.cno.org/;To assess conformance to entry-to-practice competencies;To assess eligibility for registration, membership renewal or reinstatement;To respond to requests for examination accommodation;To process applications and process payments;To assess members’ continued competence through CNO’s Quality Assurance Program;To enforce standards of practice and conduct;To address risks to the public when alerted that there is a concern about a nurse’s practice or conduct.);To verify one’s identity and respond to requests or specific inquiries;To carry out CNO’s operations, including selecting members for appointment to committees and contacting potential volunteers and focus group participants;To support all activities of Council and Committee members;To inform you about CNO initiatives or important updates;For data analytics and to compile aggregate statistics for internal reporting purposes;To assess and manage risk, including detecting and preventing fraud or error; andTo meet auditing, legal and regulatory processes, and requirements.

CNO takes all reasonable steps to protect the interest of individuals when disclosing personal information. We do not disclose personal information for purposes other than those for which it was collected unless you have provided consent to do so or if we are required/permitted by law to disclose the information.

When CNO is notified about a nurse’s practice or conduct, we contact the nurse to inform them of the complaint. We may be required/permitted by law to disclose a limited amount of personal information without explicit consent.

CNO members may consent to releasing their name, email and/or mailing address to the following external parties:

Educational institutions conducting research in nursing;Entities providing information on continuing education opportunities; andNursing organizations (for example, unions and professional associations).

Without your explicit consent, we also share your personal information with:

Government entities as required for specific programs such as the federal Canadian Institute for Health Information Nursing Database, the Ontario Ministry of Health’s Health Professions Database and eHealth Ontario; andThird-party service providers who assist us in fulfilling our mandate, including outsourced IT partners.

We take reasonable steps to ensure that any third-party service providers who we entrust with your personal information are reputable and have safeguards in place to protect this information. In working with service providers, your personal information may be transferred to a foreign jurisdiction to be processed or stored. Additionally, such information may be provided to law enforcement or national security authorities of that jurisdiction upon request, in order to comply with foreign laws.

When you visit CNO’s website, we automatically receive and record information on our server logs from your browser or mobile platform, including the date and time of your visit, your IP address, unique device identifier, browser type and other device information (such as your operating system version and mobile network provider) via cookies. By setting cookies, CNO is able to enhance a user’s online experience (e.g. once you are logged in to the member portal, you are able to move between webpages without having to re-enter your credentials). You can disable cookies through your website browser, but this may affect your user experience.

The information we collect when you visit CNO’s website helps us analyze and improve the performance of our digital services. CNO uses Google Analytics for web statistical analysis. If you wish, you may opt-out of being tracked by Google Analytics by disabling or refusing the cookies; by disabling JavaScript within your browser; or by using theGoogle Analytics Opt-Out Browser Add-On.

CNO makes no effort to personally identify you based on your visit to our site unless we must do so for the protection of the public or for an on-going investigation.

CNO has implemented physical, organizational, and technical security measures to guard against unauthorized or unlawful access to the personal information we manage and store. We have also taken steps to avoid accidental loss or destruction of, or damage to, your personal information. While no system is completely secure, the measures implemented by CNO significantly reduce the likelihood of a data security breach.

Here are some examples of the security controls we have in place:

Secure office premises with key card access;The use of encryption, such as a secure portal for document transfers and encrypted mobile devices;Robust authentication processes, including multi-factor authentication and complex passwords;Limited access to personal information by employees who need the information to perform their work-related duties;The use of data centers with effective physical and logical data security controls;Requiring third-party service providers contractually commit to protecting the personal information entrusted to them;Locked filing cabinets, secure printing and shredding bins for paper records; andAnnual privacy and data security training for all employees to raise awareness of data protection responsibilities.

Further, we recommend that you do your part in protecting yourself from unauthorized access to your personal information. For example, ensure your member portal login credentials are not shared with anyone. CNO is not liable for any unauthorized access to your personal information that is beyond our reasonable control.

You can make a written request for access to your personal information at any time, and also request that it be corrected if there are any inaccuracies.  To make an access request, complete theRequest for Access to Personal Information Form. This form is also available through Customer Service or by contacting the Privacy Office. You will need to provide as much information as you can to help us process your request and locate the information you require.

If you need assistance in preparing your access request, please contact us and we would be pleased to help you. Upon request, CNO will also inform you of how your personal information has been or is being used, and who your personal information has been shared with.

CNO responds to access requests within 30 days unless an extension of time is required. However, there may be circumstances where access is refused or only partial information is provided, for example, in the context of an on-going investigation or to avoid harm to another individual.

CNO retains personal information for as long as necessary to fulfill legal or business purposes and in accordance with our retention schedules. Once your information is no longer required by CNO to meet legal or regulatory requirements, it is securely destroyed, erased or made anonymous. Keep in mind however that information may be retained for a lengthier period of time due to an on-going investigation or legal proceeding, and that residual information may remain in back-ups for a period of time after its destruction date.

CNO takes privacy complaints very seriously and has a procedure in place for managing any privacy-related concerns to ensure that they are responded to in a timely and effective manner. CNO’s Privacy Officer oversees the containment, investigation and corrective actions for all privacy breaches and incident.

We may offer links from our website to the sites of third parties who can provide services to you. CNO makes no representations as to such third parties’ privacy practices and we recommend that you review their privacy policies before providing your personal information to any such third parties.

CNO’s use of social media serves as an extension of our presence on the Internet and helps us build a positive brand image as well as provide useful information to the public. Social media account(s), such as CNO’s Facebook and Twitter accounts, are not hosted on CNO’s servers. Users who choose to interact with CNO via social media should read the terms of service and privacy policies of these services/platforms.

We may update this Privacy Policy from time to time to better reflect our current personal information handling practices and encourage you to review this document frequently. The “Last Updated” date at the bottom of this Privacy Policy indicates when changes to this policy were published and are thus in force.

Any inquires, concerns or complaints regarding privacy should be directed to CNO’s Privacy Office at:

Privacy OfficeCollege of Nurses of Ontario101 Davenport RoadToronto, ONM5R 3P1Tel: 416-928-0900 or 1-800-3875526 (toll-free in Canada), Ext. 7633privacyofficer@cnomail.org

Thank you for your continued trust in the College of Nurses of Ontario.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Terms of Use
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/privacy/terms-of-use/
Title: Terms of Use

Visitors to the College of Nurses of Ontario ("the College") website agree to the terms and conditions set out in this Terms of Use Agreement (“Agreement”). By accessing and using this website, you are indicating your acceptance to be bound by this Agreement. If you do not accept this Agreement, please leave this site immediately.

In addition, when using the services available on this website, you may be subject to specific terms related to that service that will be outlined for you. If you do not agree, you will not be able to access that particular service on this site.

The College reserves the right to change this Agreement at any time by updating this page. Use of the website after such changes are posted will signify your acceptance of these revised terms and conditions. You should visit this page periodically to review this Agreement.

Council Members, applicants and members of the College will be given the option to create an account to use certain password protected areas of this website.

When registering for your account, you agree to provide current, complete and accurate information about yourself, and you agree not to misrepresent your identity.

It is your responsibility to maintain and keep current information about yourself on this website at all times.

You are responsible for the confidentiality of your login information, and you agree to let the College know immediately of any breach or potential breach in the confidentiality of your login information.

The College tracks the Internet Protocol (IP) addresses of visitors to this website. This information is used for the statistical purposes of observing general user traffic through different areas of the site.

Information gathered from logging IP addresses may include the type of browser used, the date and time of a user’s visit, and the pages visited while on the site. No personal information can be extracted from these records that would identify individual visitors.

A cookie is a small amount of data that may be written onto your hard drive when you visit a site. It identifies you as a previous visitor of the site and is most often used to personalize settings and user preferences.

Cookies are used by websites to determine which pages are visited most often. Sites that require a username and password also use cookies to “remember” visitors as they travel between pages within a restricted area of the site. Each website deploys a unique cookie for every visitor, so one cookie cannot be “read” by another website.

The College’s website stores a random string of text in a cookie to track each unique user session on the website. Cookies used by the College's website do not store any personal information and expire when your browser is closed.

Any information sent or received over the Internet is generally not secure. Thus, if you communicate with the College using e-mail, the College cannot guarantee the security or confidentiality of any communication to or from our e-mail servers.

However, the College strives to protect your information when you use one of our on-line forms by using Secure Socket Layer (SSL) technology.  Information entered on a secure page (identified by ‘https://’ in the web address you see at the top of your browser) is encrypted as it travels on the Internet to our secure servers.

The names, graphics and logos on this site are the exclusive property of the College and may not be copied, imitated or used in whole or in part without the prior written consent of the College.

Users of this website may not:

use this website in a way that could damage it or the material displayed on itinterfere with website security or the security of linked sitesdisrupt or interfere with another person’s use of the websiteuse this website or the information on it to send any type of mass e-mailsell material from this website or reproduce it for sale without written permission from the College

Except as otherwise specifically noted, the materials on this site may be reproduced for personal or educational use, in whole or in part and by any means, without charge or further permission from the College, provided that:

due diligence is exercised in ensuring the accuracy and currency of the materials reproducedthe College is identified as the sourcethe reproduction is not represented as an official version of the materials reproduced; or as having been made in affiliation with, or with the endorsement of, the College.

Commercial or for-profit redistribution of the materials on this site, in whole or in part, is prohibited except with the written consent of the College.

No one may reproduce materials on this website as part of a published work (such as a book, journal or website) without prior written consent of the College. If the College grants permission, users are also required to notify the College when the final work is published or posted.

For permission to reproduce the materials on this site for commercial redistribution or republication, please contact the College Librarian.

Links to other websites and social media platforms are provided as a convenience only. These links do not imply an endorsement or affiliation with the owners of any linked sites or platforms. The College has no control over the content or reliability of any linked sites provided. These sites are the sole responsibility of their owners and operators.

The College permits linking to pages on this website, provided links are opened in a new browser window, so the page can be viewed in its intended context. The College does not permit any linking to its website that misinforms users about the origin and ownership of the College's web content.

Unless the College tells you otherwise, other websites and social media platforms that link to this website are not associated with us or endorsed by us.

You agree to use this website in a lawful manner, consistent with all relevant local, national and international laws and regulations.

Subject to applicable law, in no event shall the College, or its directors, partners, employees or agents be liable for damages of any kind including, without limitation, any direct, special, indirect, punitive, incidental or consequential damages including, without limitation, any loss or damages in the nature of or relating to lost business, lost savings, lost data and/or lost profits arising from your use of, reliance upon, or inability to use the College’s website or the content available on the site, regardless of the cause and whether arising in contract, tort (including negligence), or otherwise. The foregoing limitation shall apply even if the College knew of or ought to have known of the possibility of such damages.



This website and the content available on the site is provided “as is”. While the College  endeavors to provide content that is correct, accurate and timely, no representations or warranties are made regarding this website and/or the content available on the site, including, without limitation, no representation or warranty that (i) the website or content will be accurate, complete, current, timely or suitable for any particular purpose, (ii) that the operation of the website will be uninterrupted or error-free, (iii) that defects or errors in the website or the content will be corrected, (iv) that the website will be free from viruses or harmful components, and (v) that communications to or from the website will be secure and/or not intercepted. You acknowledge and agree that you are using the College’s website at your own risk.

By accessing or using the College’s website, you agree that all matters relating to your access to, or use of, the website and its content shall be governed by the laws of the Province of Ontario and the laws of Canada, without regard to conflict of laws principles. You agree and hereby submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Province of Ontario with respect to all matters relating to your access to and use of this site.

In the event that any portion of this Agreement is deemed to be invalid or unenforceable, such portion shall be deemed severed. The remaining portions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect, without being invalidated in any way.

The College may, in its sole discretion, cancel or terminate your right to use this website, or any part of the site, at any time without notice. In the event that you are notified of such termination, you are no longer authorized to access the website or the part of the website affected by such cancellation or termination.The College shall not be liable to any party for such termination.

If you have questions about the College’s mandate, this website, or this Terms of Use Agreement, please refer to the'Contact Us'area for ways to contact the College.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Mandatory Member Emails
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/mandatory-member-emails/
Title: FAQs: Mandatory Member Emails

All members are required to provide the College with an email address.

The following questions and answers provide some background information about the requirement to provide an email address, and how your email will be used by the College.

Why do I have to provide my email to the College?

The College is increasing the amount of electronic communication with you. The decision to make email addresses mandatory was based on a number of factors. For example, ongoing surveys of members indicate that an increasing number of you prefer to receive information electronically, and almost 92 percent of you have already provided us an email address. By having your email address, the College can deliver important information to you in a timely and efficient manner.

How much email will I receive from the College?

We have no intention of filling your inbox. We will only send email about significant regulatory developments at the College, membership renewal notices, developments in practice standards, or emergency situations affecting health care workers across the province. You may also receive the occasional survey that is being conducted by the College or notices about opportunities to get involved at the College, such as Council elections or committee appointments.

What happens if I do not supply an email address?

You can log in toMaintain Your Membershipand add an email to your information now, or you can provide an email when you complete your annual membership renewal, which starts in October. Members who do not supply an email address will not be able to complete their renewal, as a valid email address will be required to renew. You will also not receive notice when a new issue ofThe Standardis online, renewal deadlines are approaching, or when changes to provincial legislation, College by-laws or practice standards have come into effect.

An email address will also more easily allow you to retrieve your online account information if you can't remember your username, password or security question answers when you log in to your Maintain Your Membership account. Rather than making you call the College for assistance, we will be able to send you reset information to the email address you provided.

What should I consider when providing my email address?

The by-law states that members must provide "the member's primary email address that is checked personally by the member on a regular basis." To ensure that you consistently receive College email messages, consider choosing an email address that you check at least once a week and that you do not share with other people (such as a spouse). Also, select an email address that you won't have to change too often.

How can I supply my email address?

Go to the Maintain Your Membership section ofwww.cno.org, log in to your account and add one. If you provided an email address before, visit your account to check that it is current.

I don't have an email address. How can I get one?

You can easily register for an email address through many different providers. Gmail, Hotmail and Yahoo are among the most common and are free.

I'm not online at home, so how will I be able to check email?

Members are responsible for checking and reading email from the College. Computers with web access can be found at local libraries, community centres or internet cafes. If your workplace permits, access your email there, or ask to borrow a friend or family member's computer or mobile device.

How do I change an email address I've given to the College?

You can log in to your account in the Maintain Your Membership section on the College's website and update your information there. Or, you can add or update your email when you renew your membership in the fall. Members are responsible for keeping their email addresses up to date.

Will my email address be shared or made public?

No. Your email will only be used for College-related business. We will not share it with third parties without your permission, and we will not post it on Find a Nurse.





------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Annual Membership Renewal
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/annual-membership-renewal/
Title: Annual Membership Renewal

Your fees help CNO respond to the evolving needs of the health care system, while building innovative and sustainable solutions for now and into the future.

AMR is now open!

You can complete AMR by:

filling out the Annual Membership Renewal (AMR) form, which includes questions about your employment status, areas of practice and educationpaying an annual fee

CNO thanks you in advance for completing AMR, for the important role you play in the health care system, and your ongoing efforts to protect the public through safe nursing practice.

AMR will open on Wednesday, Nov. 1, 2023.

The deadline to renew without additional late fees is Sunday, Dec. 31, 2023.

All nurses are required by provincial legislation to register with CNO and renew their registration annually. Paying your registration fees with CNO renews your ability to practice nursing in Ontario.

Our purpose is to protect the public by promoting safe nursing practice. CNO is a regulator, which means we promote nursing standards, registers nurses to practice, administers a Quality Assurance Program and ensures each person calling themselves a nurse in Ontario has the knowledge, skill, and judgment to practice safely.

And, as a regulator for the largest group of health care providers in Canada, CNO has a proud 60-year history of influencing the patient safety agenda in Ontario and beyond. We do this by working closely withseveral partners in safety, including employers, educators and government. Together we support safe nursing practice in Ontario.

Your fees support the important work of protecting the public by promoting safe nursing practice because you are helping us to:

support data capacity that informs workforce planning.maintain the registration of approximately 180,000 nurses who were actively practicing in 2023.provide the safest and highest quality care to patients by engaging in quality assurance activities that promote self-reflection and life-long learning throughout your careers.increase access to quality care across the province through updates to RN prescribing practice standards, which will allow registered nurses who meet requirements to prescribe certain medications and communicate a diagnosis.implement the voluntary Nurses’ Health Program for Ontario nurses designed to encourage them to seek treatment for substance use and/or mental health disorders that may affect their ability to practice nursing safely.

You deserve a regulator that is agile and responsive to the health care needs of our local communities, while embracing the global nature of the profession.By working together, we protect the public through safe nursing practice.

Your renewal fee funds CNO and our regulatory processes. So, paying your fees to be registered with CNO not only renews your ability to practice nursing in Ontario, but it also makes you a contributor in nursing regulation and public protection.

In Ontario, legislation identifies certain professions that are self-regulated to ensure public safety. Nursing is one of these self-regulated professions, along with25 other health care professionsin Ontario. Members of these professions pay a regulatory body to set and enforce standards and entry requirements.

Having one set of standards and entry requirements and providing oversight and accountability for all nurses helps ensure public confidence in the quality of nurses in the province.

By renewing your annual fees with CNO you are also renewing your professional commitment to standards and public safety.

In Ontario, nursing is self-regulated and it’s through your fees that the nursing profession is regulated in Ontario. Renewing your registration and paying a fee makes you a part of the regulation of your profession. As a member of CNO, you can actively participate in many of these regulatory processes. You can join CNOCouncil,committeesand reference groups. Or provide feedback about changes to by-laws, regulations and standards of practices.

The 2024 renewal fee for nurses in the General and Extended classes is $340. (With HST, the total is $384.20.) The renewal fee for nurses in the Non-Practising class is $63 before taxes. (With HST, the total is $71.19.)

No. Your application with CNO is different than renewal. Renewal is for nurses who are already registered in the General Class. If you are an applicant, please continue to pursue your application. We will ask you to pay your registration fee at the time you enter the General Class.

Application fees are one time and do not need to be renewed.

Yes, if you want to remain registered in the General Class in 2024, you need to renew by Sunday, Dec. 31, 2023. This includes paying the annual fee, confirming the Declaration of Practice and holdingprofessional liability protection (PLP). Nurses in the General and Extended classes are required to hold PLP, regardless of whether they are currently practicing nursing.

If you don’t want to renew, you have the option of resigning your membership or moving to the Non-Practising class. If you move to the Non-Practising Class, your renewal fee will be lower, and you don’t need to hold PLP. However, if you want to return to practicing nursing after your maternity leave, youwill need to return to the General Class. This includes:

applying forreinstatementpaying the reinstatement feesmeeting the requirements(which can include providing evidence of practice, language proficiency and possibly writing the Jurisprudence exam).

We cannot confirm how long it will take to review and process your reinstatement application so you can return to practice. You shouldcontact CNObefore you anticipate returning to practice to allow us time to process  your reinstatement.

We understand it can be challenging financially when you’ve only recently paid your registration fee, and now you are being asked to pay the renewal fee for 2024. Your registration fee initiated your ability to practice nursing in Ontario for the rest of 2023. For example, if you registered (or reinstated your registration) in November 2023, you initiated your ability to practice nursing in November and December 2023. When you pay your 2024 renewal fees before December 31, 2023, you are renewing your ability to practice nursing for the entire calendar year of 2024.

Regulation costs the same for all nurses regardless of category. Our processes, such as registration renewal, online practice support or developing practice standards, require the same resources whether it’s for RNs, RPNs or NPs.

Since CNO’s role is to protect the public, it would be a conflict of interest to provide professional liability protection. For example, it would be a conflict if we have to administer a discipline penalty against a nurse and then cover the nurse’s liability claim.

Unions and professional associations, such as ONA, CNPS, RNAO, RPNAO or NPAO, are organizations that exist to represent nurses’ interest. This includes providing you with access to professional liability protection.

And, while our roles are different, we partner with these organizations to ensure everyone in Ontario benefits from safe, quality nursing care.

You can pay online using credit card, Visa Debit, Mastercard Debit or a prepaid credit card. (As of October 2023, many banks and our payment partners decided to no longer support INTERAC Online transactions.)

You can use Visa and Mastercard Debit cards to make payments online. One key difference between INTERAC and Visa or Mastercard Debit is that INTERAC transactions can only be processed within Canada, whereas Visa and Mastercard Debit can be used internationally. Most banks in Canada have added this feature to the bank cards you use at an ATM or a merchant. Your bank card will say “Visa Debit” or “Mastercard Debit”, usually on the right-hand side of the card, if you have a Visa or Mastercard Debit. If your debit card is not a Visa or Mastercard Debit, you may need to contact your bank for further instructions.

A Visa or Mastercard credit card and a Visa or Mastercard Debit card are different. A credit card does not draw any money from your account immediately and must be paid back in the future, subject to interest charges. This is why many banks have added the feature to their bank cards.

When used as a Visa Debit card, or Mastercard Debit card, the transaction to draw the money goes through the Visa or Mastercard network rather than the INTERAC network. INTERAC is generally limited to Canada, while Visa or Mastercard debit can be used globally.

Yes, it is safe. We don’t process or store your financial information within our own systems. When you pay your registration fee, the transaction is securely handled by a third-party vendor. We do not have access to, retain or share your credit card or banking information.

CNO’s fiscal year is aligned with the calendar year. We know the winter holidays can be an expensive time for some, but when you pay your renewal fees before December 31 you are supporting CNO’s financial sustainability for the next calendar year. This ensures we can continue to regulate nursing in Ontario in the public interest.

You will be charged a late fee of $125 before taxes ($141.25 with HST.)

Other key dates:

Friday, Jan. 12, 2024: We mail Notice of Intent to Suspend letters to those who haven’t renewed by Sunday, Dec. 31, 2023. Once you receive this letter, you have 30 days to complete your renewal and pay the required fees, including the late fee of $125 before taxes ($141.25 with HST).

Thursday, Feb. 15, 2024: We suspend people who haven’t paid the fees and completed the form by now. At this point, you will have another 30 days to provide all outstanding fees and information. However, since your membership is suspended, you can’t practice as a nurse in Ontario until you have renewed.

Monday, March 18, 2024: We expire memberships for those who have not completed renewal by Monday, March 18, 2024.

Yes, CNO shares renewal information in the following ways:

Go toMaintain Your Membershipand log in with your email address and password.

Unless you have changed it, your password is the same one you used last year.

For more information about how CNO uses your email address and why it is required, visitwww.cno.org/emailfaq.

If you are using an older version of a web browser, you may have difficulty accessing Maintain Your Membership.Check hereto make sure your browser will work properly.

As part of annual Quality Assurance requirements, you must develop and maintain a Learning Plan, and acknowledge that you have met the QA requirements or developed a learning plan as part of completing AMR. We do not require that you submit the Learning Plan to CNO.

Always use the Previous or Next buttons when using the AMR application.Do notclick Back or Forward in your browser.

Please be patient, as many nurses are renewing at the same time. If you see a Please Wait message,do notrefresh or reload your page.

During busy times, it may take longer for pages to load. Please be patient, anddo notrefresh or reload your page. All browsers except Safari should display a progress bar to show you how the information is processing.

Yes, you can pause the renewal application at any time provided that you complete renewal before Sunday, Dec. 31. Just scroll to the bottom of the page and click the Exit and Finish Later button. Also, remember to log out of Maintain Your Membership by clicking the logout button in the top right-hand corner of the page.

It may seem like we’re collecting a lot of information, but it’s required under theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991. The renewal information also informs the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care’s policies and programs.

Most nurses only need about 12 minutes to complete renewal, but it can take up to 30 minutes. Before starting, we suggest you have your work experience information and other practice details handy, so you can move quickly and smoothly through the process.

Log in to Maintain Your Membership using your email and password. Then, click on Renew Your Membership Now, and simply choose “Français” (French) in the top right-hand corner.

Once you submit your payment, you will receive a confirmation that the transaction was successful. Please wait for this confirmation before closing your browser. At peak times, there may be a short delay before you see the confirmation while payment is processing.

After renewing and paying the fee, you’ll find the View/Print Receipt button at the bottom of the page.If you have already logged out of AMR, log back in to Maintain My Membership, clickNowand choose View/Print Receipt.

There is a Logout button in the top right-hand corner of every AMR page. Click on it to make sure you’re logged out ofMaintain Your Membership. This is especially important if you share a computer at home or work.

Once you have completed the renewal form and paid the fees, you can log in toMaintain Your Membership,click on renewal and check your Renewal Status.

Notice of Intent to Suspend

If you do not complete the form and pay the fees by 11:59 p.m. EST on Sunday, Dec. 31, 2023, you will receive a Notice of Intent to Suspend. This year, notices will be mailed no later than Friday, Jan. 12, 2024. Once you receive the Notice of Intent to Suspend, you have 30 days to complete your renewal and pay the required fees, including the late fee of $125 ($141.25 with HST).

Suspension

Once the Notice of Intent (NOI) letter has been mailed out, if you do not pay the fees and complete the form within 30 days, CNO will suspend your registration on Thursday, Feb. 15, 2024. At this point, you will have another 30 days to provide all outstanding fees and information.

However, since your membership is suspended, you can’t practice as a nurse in Ontario until you have renewed. You also can’t use the titles “Registered Nurse,” “Registered Practical Nurse,” “Nurse Practitioner” or “nurse.”

Practicing nursing in Ontario while your membership is suspended is a serious offence. If you have been suspended, speak to your employer(s) and stop practicing immediately.

Expiry

If, after the next 30 days, you still haven’t provided the outstanding fees and information, your CNO membership will expire on Monday, March 18, 2024. To resume practicing in Ontario as a nurse, you will need to meet the requirements forreinstatementand pay additional fees.

Since your membership is expired, you can’t practice as a nurse in Ontario. You also can’t use the titles “Registered Nurse,” “Registered Practical Nurse,” “Nurse Practitioner” or “nurse.”

Practicing nursing in Ontario while your membership is expired is a serious offence. If your membership has expired, speak to your employer(s) and stop practicing immediately.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Declaration of Practice
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/declaration-of-practice/
Title: FAQs: Declaration of Practice

The College’s Registration Regulation requires all nurses in the General or Extended Classes to make a declaration about their nursing practice within the previous three years.

Nurses will make this declaration at the time of membership renewal, or at any other time when requested by the College.

Below are answers to frequently asked questions about the declaration of practice.

What is the declaration of practice? When do I make it?

While completing the Annual Membership Renewal form each year, and at any other time upon request by the College, members of the:

General Class will be required to declare whether they practised nursing within the previous three years.Extended Class (i.e., Nurse Practitioners) are required to declare whether they have practised in a clinical NP role with a population appropriate for the specialty certificate they hold within the previous three years (seeFAQs: Clinical NP Practice). NPs who hold multiple specialty certificates will be required to make the declaration for each specialty certificate they hold.

If requested by the College, members must provide evidence to support their declaration.

Why am I required to make this declaration?

The declaration supports accurate and transparent information about nurses. The public will know that members registered in the General or Extended classes have recent nursing practice for the certificate(s) they hold. This information also supports health human resource planning in the province.

The declaration of practice also ensures that only members who practise nursing on an ongoing basis are permitted to maintain the privilege to practise nursing in either the General or Extended classes.

Finally, maintaining registration with the College and meeting membership requirements contribute to nurses' awareness of the changes to nursing legislation and regulation in Ontario, and the effect those changes have on their practice and responsibilities as self-regulated health professionals. It also supports nurses in remaining aware of changes to their scope of practice and the practice of other health professionals with whom they work.

How do I determine that I have "practised nursing" according to the certificate of registration I hold?

Review our list of reflective questions to help you determine whether you have practiced nursing.

An NP must maintainclinical NP practiceto remain registered in the Extended Class. This clinical practice must include:

direct interaction with the client population(s) consistent with each specialty certificate that the NP holdsandthe use of advanced nursing knowledge and decision-making skill in health assessment, diagnosis and therapeutics in the treatment of those clients.



Do I have to practise nursing for a minimum number of hours to meet the practice requirement?

No. The College does not specify the number of hours that members must practise within the three-year timeframe. The amount of nursing practice needed to maintain RPN, RN, or NP competence will vary for individual nurses based on their experience, knowledge and skill level. It is up to each member to determine how much practice is required to maintain that level of competence. In addition to the practice requirement, members are also expected to maintain competence and meet their Quality Assurance Program requirements.

How is the three-year period determined?

The three-year period is unique to each member. It is based on the date you last practised nursing according to your certificate of registration in Ontario. For example, if you stopped practising nursing on July 1, 2011, you have until June 30, 2014 to acquire the necessary nursing practice in order to maintain your certificate of registration.

Members who have recently registered with the College, or had a certificate of registration reinstated, have three years from the date of registration or reinstatement to acquire the necessary nursing practice (see below).

I have not practised nursing in the previous three years. What does this mean for me?

If you have not practised nursing at any time in the previous three years, you will have to answer 'no' to the declaration of practice. You will no longer be eligible to hold registration in the General or Extended classes. You can either apply to register in the Non-Practising Class or resign from the College. If you do not choose either option, your certificate of registration will expire and you will no longer be permitted to practise nursing in Ontario.

I practised nursing in the previous three years, but not in Ontario. What does this mean for me?

If you have practised nursing in the previous three years, then you can answer ‘yes’ to the declaration of practice.

Does the College provide a list of nursing positions (i.e., staff nurse, nurse educator) that satisfy the declaration requirement?

No. Members are expected to reflect on their nursing practice and determine whether it satisfies the requirement as outlined above. RPNs, RNs and NPs work in roles that involve various dimensions of nursing practice, including clinical and non-clinical components. What you must determine is whether you meet the requirement, irrespective of your nursing position.

Does volunteering in an RPN, RN, or NP role meet the practice requirement?

Providing nursing services in a volunteer capacity meets the requirement if it is consistent with the requirement as described above. Keep in mind that you have to provide evidence to support your declaration if the College requests it.

I am a new member and I have not had the opportunity to practise nursing yet. What does this mean for me?

New members of the College have three years from the date of registration to acquire the necessary nursing practice. Since you have been registered for less than three years, you will be permitted to maintain your certificate even though you have not practised yet.

However, if you do not practise nursing within your first three years of registering with the College, then you will be asked to either join the Non-Practising Class or resign from the College when you try to renew your membership for a fourth year.

I am registered as both an RPN and RN in the General Class. Can I use the same nursing practise to answer “yes” to the declaration for both certificates?

As a dual registrant, you will be asked to declare whether you have practised nursing within the previous three years. Your answer to the declaration will be applied to your RPN and RN General Class certificates of registration.

Reflect on your nursing practice and determine if it meets the requirements described above. Remember that the College may ask you to provide evidence that supports the declaration that you make.

Information about how the Declaration of Practice affects NPs can be found atFAQs: Clinical NP Practice.

I'm an employer located outside of Ontario, but some nurses employed by my agency work in Ontario. Will their employment by a non-Ontario agency affect their practice declaration?

The employer's location is not relevant.  What matters is whether a nurse is able to declare nursing practice within the last three years.

To determine if they have practised nursing, nurses should consult the definition ofpractising nursinghere. Note also that NPs are required to have practised in a clinical NP role providing direct care to a population appropriate for their specialty certificate. Details about these requirements are provided in the preceding FAQs for nurses.

What am I required to provide to the nurses employed by me to support their practice declaration?

Employers are not required to provide anything at the time the nurse is making her or his declaration. However, at a later date, employers may be asked by a nurse or the College to provide some form of documentation that supports the declaration made by the nurse. The evidence will need to verify whether the nurse practised nursing as defined.

A nurse at my facility has been on long-term disability for over three years. How will the declaration of practice affect her employment?

Since this nurse has not practised for over three years, she will have to answer 'no' to the declaration of practice question and enter the Non-Practising Class. It is up to you, as the employer, to determine the requirements for nurses who are in your employ but have not practised nursing for over three years. When nurses in the Non-Practising Class want to return to nursing practice, they must apply for thereinstatementof their  General or Extended Class certificate.

I have received a resume from a nurse, but when I checked Find a Nurse on the College's website, it says this person is "not entitled to practise" because they are in the Non-Practising Class. Can I hire this nurse?

No, you cannot hire this individual for a position that involves nursing practice (such as the performance of the controlled acts authorized to nurses) or one in which the person would be portraying her/himself as entitled to practise nursing.  It is your decision whether to hire this person for a position that does not involve nursing practice. Members of the Non-Practising Class are prohibited from practising nursing in either a paid or volunteer position in Ontario.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Non-Practising Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/nonpractising-class-faq/
Title: FAQs: Non-Practising Class

The following are responses to commonly asked questions about the Non-Practising Class.

Membership in theNon-Practising Classgives current or former members of the College’s General or Extended classes who are not currently practising nursing the option of maintaining their registration with the College. Nurses registered in this class are still considered members of the College.

Established on January 1, 2013, the Non-Practising Class replaced the College's Retired Class, thereby enabling nurses of any age, rather than only those aged 65 or older, to maintain registration with the College while not practising nursing.

Members of this class pay a reduced fee and are not required to fulfill the same requirements to maintain their registration as nurses in the General and Extended Classes. For example, Non-Practising Class members do not participate in the Quality Assurance Program and they do not have to maintain Professional Liability Protection coverage.

The Non-Practising Class protects the public interest by providing members with a certificate of registration that accurately reflects their non-practice of the profession.

Each year, when nurses renew their membership, the College collects demographic data, including information about where they are working and their nursing role (if any). The Non-Practising Class allows the College to collect more accurate statistical information about Ontario's nurses.

If you are no longer practising, and you don’t plan to practise in the next three years, you may wish to resign or consider registration in theNon-Practising Class. You cannot practise nursing in Ontario, either paid or unpaid, when you’re in this class. For example, you can’t volunteer as a nurse.You can call yourself a nurse, but you must make it clear that you are not qualified to practise nursing in Ontario.

Nursing practice is diverse and is not defined by your role, title, practice setting or a procedure or activity you may be performing. Practising nursing is not the same as being employed as a nurse. For example, if you volunteer as a nurse, you are considered to be practicing nursing. However, CNO doesn’t recognize time spentcaring for a friend or family memberas nursing practice. And if you have been onmedical leavefor three years, even if you are still employed as a nurse, you have not been practicing nursing.

Review theEvidence of practicecriteria to see if you are practicing or not. If you are still unclear, reflect on the following questions.

If, after answering these questions, you decide you are practicing, you must:

register or renew in the correct practising classuphold the College’s practice standards and guidelinescomplete your annualQuality Assurancerequirementscomply with thereportingrequirements.hold Professional Liability Protection (PLP)

TheNursing Act, 1991defines the practice of nursing as:

The promotion of health and the assessment of, the provision of care for and the treatment of health conditions by supportive, preventive, therapeutic, palliative and rehabilitative means in order to attain or maintain optimal function.

Nursing practice includes both clinical and non-clinical roles. You can be practising nursing while not providing direct client care. For example, when working in education, administration, policy or research roles. Nursing is notsolely defined as a bedside role and direct client care.

To practise as a nurse in Ontario, you must beregisteredwith the College of Nurses of Ontario. For your work outside of Ontario to be considered nursing practice, you must be registered, if required, with the nursing regulatory body or authority in the jurisdiction where you were or are currently practicing. For example, if you are using nursing practice in the Philippines as your evidence of recent practice, you must either be, or have been, registered with the Professional Regulation Commission in the Philippines at the time.

If you are currently in the Non-Practicing Class, or if your General Class registration has lapsed, you mustreinstate.

Current or former members of the College’s General or Extended Classes can join the Non-Practising Class.

You are not eligible to join this class if you have never been registered with the College, or if you have only been registered in the Temporary, Special Assignment, and/or Emergency Assignment classes.

Nurses who meet the eligibility criteria in the previous question can request a Non-Practising Class application form by contacting the College’sCustomer Service Centre. Nurses can apply to the Non-Practising Class and remain registered in this class for as long as they want.

No. There is no obligation to join the Non-Practising Class.

Former members pay an application fee of $56.50. There is no application fee for current members. The annual renewal fee is $56.50.

Nurses in the Non-Practising Class who are employed in another province or country will have their employer information from that jurisdiction posted inFind a Nurse, the online public register at www.cno.org. This will show that they are employed outside of Ontario.

No. Nurses in this class are not permitted to practise nursing in Ontario or to hold themselves out as qualified to practise as a nurse, in either a paid or volunteer capacity, in Ontario.

No. Members of the Non-Practising Class cannot practise nursing in Ontario. You cannot hold a Non-Practising Class certificate and a General Class (or an Extended, Temporary, Special Assignment or Emergency Assignment Class) certificate with the College at the same time. However, if you are registered as an RN and RPN in the General Class, you can apply to hold Non-Practising Class certificates in both categories.

ContactRNAO/WeRPNfor information about their membership requirements.

As a member of the Non-Practising Class, you continue to be a member of the College and therefore can call yourself a nurse. You can use the titles “RN Non-Practising” or “RPN Non-Practising,”oryou can use the RN or RPN title without the “Non-Practising” qualifier.

If you do not use “Non-Practising” in your title or when introducing yourself, you must make it clear that you are not qualified to practise nursing in Ontario.

What do I have to do when I want to return to nursing practice after being in the Non-Practising Class?

Nurses registered in the Non-Practising Class who want to resume nursing practice must apply forreinstatement.

Reinstatement is a means by which former members of the College and Non-Practising Class members can re-apply for their General or Extended Class membership without having to meet all of the requirements of first-time College applicants.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Professional Liability Protection
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/professional-liability-protection/
Title: FAQs: Professional Liability Protection (PLP)

All members (excluding those in the Non-Practising Class) must hold Professional Liability Protection (PLP).

The following information is for members who may have questions about the PLP requirement.

What is professional liability protection?Professional liability protection (PLP) provides financial compensation for members of the public who have been harmed as a result of malpractice or negligence by a professional.

Who does this new requirement affect?All members of the General, Extended, Temporary, Emergency Assignment and Special Assignment classes are required to hold PLP. Members in those classes are accountable for ensuring they hold PLP that meets the requirements set out inBy-Law 44.4.

What about nurses who are not practising?Nurses in the Non-Practising Class do not need PLP. However, all members in the other classes are required to hold PLP, regardless of whether they are currently practising nursing. The public can expect that any nurse who is listed on Find a Nurse as eligible to practise nursing in Ontario has professional liability protection.

Does this by-law mean I need to purchase PLP?If you are employed as a nurse, then your employer may have coverage that covers its staff, including nurses. You are responsible for confirming that this coverage meets the requirements set out in the by-law. If it does, then you do not need to purchase additional PLP.

Will the College ask for proof of PLP?The College may request proof of adequate PLP at any time. When the College requires proof from a member, it will inform the member of the specific type of proof it needs. For example, it may be a letter from an employer, confirmation of membership in an association that provides PLP, or a certificate of insurance from a private insurer. Nurses in the identified classes are required to declare that they understand their obligation to maintain PLP in accordance with the by-laws as a condition of membership.

I don’t have PLP. How can I get it to meet the by-law requirements?The by-law sets out three options for members:

through your employerthrough a provincial or national nursing associationthrough protection under the Treasury Board of Canada Policy on Legal Assistance and Indemnification (for federally employed nurses)orby purchasing your own professional liability protection from an insurance provider.

How much PLP coverage do I need to have?The minimum coverage required is:

$1 million per claim for General, Temporary, Emergency Assignment and Special Assignment classes$5 million per claim for Extended Class (NPs).

If your coverage includes a maximum amount that will be covered in a year, it must be at least:

$2 million per year for General, Temporary, Emergency Assignment and Special Assignment classes$5 million per year for Extended Class (NPs)

What kind of PLP exists?There are two types of liability protection:

If your liability protection is “claims-made” protection, you are required to obtain extended coverage (called "tail coverage") for a period of two years after the policy or protection ends.

Who should I talk to if I have any questions about my PLP coverage?Your employer, professional association, insurance broker or insurance company should be able to answer questions about whether your employer’s policy, your association’s protection or your policy meets the requirements in the College's by-law.

Please note the College does not recommend or endorse any insurance provider.

PLP and Nursing Practice

What if I work in more than one setting?Nurses need to be confident they have PLP coverage for all of their nursing practice. For example, nurses working for two employers will need to confirm that both employers have PLP that meets the by-law requirements. If they do not, the member will need to obtain additional coverage to address any gaps.

What if I am not practising but do not want to join the Non-Practising Class?Members who are not practising but remain in the General, Extended, Temporary, Special Assignment or Emergency Assignment Class are accountable for having PLP .

I am not working in a clinical role. Why do I need PLP?Members in the specified classes are eligible to practice nursing to their full scope and may change roles at any time. The College requires that all nurses who are eligible to practise nursing in Ontario hold PLP. The public can expect that any nurse who is listed on Find a Nurse as eligible to practice nursing in Ontario has professional liability protection.

I am registered as an RN and an RPN. Will I need coverage for both roles?Since you are eligible to practise as both an RN and an RPN, you are accountable as a member of the General Class to ensure you hold PLP that covers you in both roles.

I am working as an RPN in one facility and as an unregulated care provider in another. Do I need PLP that will cover me for both roles?Members of the College require PLP that will cover all of theirnursingpractice. Because nurses who work in different roles remain accountable to the College, they must ensure they have PLP that will cover them if a situation arises that would require them to step out of their UCP role and into a nursing one to provide nursing care.

Do I need PLP in the event I provide emergency care outside my practice setting?TheGood Samaritan Act, which speaks to the issue of health care professionals providing first aid and emergency care at the scene of an accident or in another emergency situation, applies to all health professionals, including nurses.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Self-Reporting
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/self-reporting1/
Title: Self-Reporting

A legal requirement for Ontario nurses

Reporting is an important component of regulating the nursing profession in Ontario. Reports alert CNO to situations where a nurse may not be practicing safely and allow CNO to take any appropriate steps to protect the public.

A nurse must self-report to CNO if she or he:

has been found guilty of any offence in any jurisdiction (except speeding or parking tickets);has been charged with any offence in any jurisdiction;has a finding of professional negligence and/or malpractice;has a finding of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity or any similar finding, in relation to the practice of nursing or any other profession in any jurisdiction; and/oris the subject of a current investigation, inquiry or proceeding for professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity or any similar investigation or proceeding in relation to the practice of nursing or any other profession in any jurisdiction.(Note: Information about CNO proceedings do not need not be reported.)

Failing to self-report is a serious matter and can result in referral to discipline.

CNO does not investigate every self-report received. CNO’s Executive Director reviews the self-report, determines what level of risk may be posed to the public, and makes a decision about an appropriate response. There are many options available to the Executive Director that do not involve an investigation. For example, a nurse may be advised to review practice standards and in some cases, may be asked to meet with a CNO representative to discuss the matter.

To self-report, please consult theReporting Guideand complete theSelf-Reporting Form.  For assistance or more information on the reports process, contact CNO atinvestigations-intake@cnomail.orgor 416 963-7504 (toll-free in Canada 1 877 963-7504).

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Q&As: Self-reporting criminal charges to the College
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/self-reporting1/qas-self-reporting-criminal-charges-to-the-college/
Title: Q&As: Self-reporting criminal charges to the College

The following questions and answers provide clarification on nurses' self-reporting obligations when they are charged with an offence.

No, since January 1, 2013, nurses have been required to self-report charges against them to the College. This obligation was part of changes made to College regulations.

Nurses must self-report the following charges:

An offence under the Criminal Code of CanadaAn offence under the Controlled Drugs and Substances ActOther offences that could be relevant to practice. For example, if a nurse is charged with a provincial offence under the Personal Health Information Protection Act for inappropriately accessing personal health information.

Speeding or parking tickets do not have to be reported to the College. As accountable professionals, nurses should use their judgment and knowledge of the nursing profession and the practice standards when considering whether a charge may be relevant to suitability to practice nursing and therefore should be reported.

No, the College does not investigate every self-report that is received. The College’s Executive Director reviews the self-report, determines what level of risk may be posed to the public, and makes a decision about an appropriate response. There are many options available to the Executive Director that do not involve an investigation. For example, a nurse may be advised to review practice standards and in some cases, may be asked to meet with a representative from the College’s professional conduct department to discuss the matter.

No, the College receives information from a wide variety of sources. Some of these sources include employers, the police, the public, and the news media.

A nurse who does not meet his or her self-reporting obligation could be investigated and may face professional conduct allegations.

Charges that are assessed as being relevant to a nurse’s suitability to practise will be posted on the nurse’s profile on Find a Nurse, the College’s public register.Visit theTransparencysection of the website for more information.

Yes, nurses are just one group of health professionals who have mandatory self-reporting obligations. Physicians, for example, must also report charges to their regulator, the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario.

For assistance or more information on the self-reporting process, email the College at investigations-intake@cnomail.orgor call 416 963-7504 (toll-free in Canada 1 877 963-7504).



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Update your info
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/update-your-info/
Title: Update your info

It’s important for the public and employers to have accurate information about nurses. It increases transparency, promotes trust and allows people to make informed decisions about who is providing their care. That’s why it’s the law that all regulated health professions in Ontario, including nurses, have a public register with information about their members. Our register is calledFind a Nurse.

It’s important thatFind a Nurseis always up-to-date. You can do your part to keep the register current by updating your information whenever it changes.

Our by-laws require nurses to update certain information within 30 days. If you do not update your info within 30 days, you might be fined $100.

If any of the below information changes, updateMaintain Your Membership.

Your job or business address.Make sure we have the address and contact info of your current employer or employers. This includes any self-employment, volunteer or unpaid positions in which you are providingnursing care.Your contact info.So that we can reach you with important information, make sure your home address, telephone number andemailare current. This information will not appear on Find a Nurse.Other registrations and licences.You must report any other professional licences or registrations in any province, territory or country. This includes additional nursing licences from other provinces or territories or outside of Canada, as well as non-nursing licences and registrations.

Hospital or health facility privileges.Make sure we have a current and complete list of each hospital or health facility where you hold privileges. You must also let us know if your privileges are revoked, suspended or restricted.

Your name on Find a Nurse should be your current legal name. If your name changes, send us a written request to have your name as it appears on Find a Nurse changed.

The request should include:

your registration numberyour former nameyour new name spelled exactly as it should appear on Find a Nurseyour signatureyour mailing address and phone numbera copy of a legal name change document, such as a marriage certificate, divorce decree, or change of name certificate

You can email your request and documents tocno@cnomail.org, orsend them by regular mail.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Verification of Registration Request
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/verification-of-registration-request/
Title: Verification of Registration Request

The purpose of this document is to verify to another regulatory board that you are, or were, registered with CNO. This document cannot be sent to an employer or a school.

Members can use Maintain Your Membership (MYM) to submit a request to verify their registration status for another regulator.

Once you login with your email and password, follow the steps in Request Verification of Registration or View Verification Requests to submit your request or view the status of your request.

Your Verification of Registration request requires payment via MasterCard, Visa or American Express. With tax, the processing fee is $16.95.

Once your payment is received, we will begin processing your request. We strongly recommend you apply to the recipient boardbeforemaking this request with CNO. Please allow six weeks for processing.

When your verification request is completed, you will be sent an email notification to the email address on your MYM account.

All verifications of registration are sent electronically. Service by mail, fax or courier is not available.

If you require assistance with this process pleaseContact Us.

No, unpaid verification requests are not saved. You are required to pay the fee at the time you make the request. If you do not, you will have to create a new request.

You can only make one verification request at a time for each category of registration. If you need a verification sent for both your RN and RPN registrations, then you will have to submit and pay for the RN verification first, and then submit and pay for the RPN verification. These are separate requests.

No, you do not. You have the same RN registration number for both classes. CNO requires a different verification fee only if you hold different categories of registration (RN vs RPN), but not if you hold a different class of registration with the same registration number (RN Extended vs RN General) or (RPN General vs RPN Non-Practising).

Document processing times with other regulators do vary and regulators may not keep your document if you did not have an application open with them at the time it was sent. We recommend you first contact the board and provide them with the date it was sent and allow them time to look for the verification document. If it was not received, pleasecontact usand we will determine if a resend is available. Please note, CNO only resends verification documents without an additional fee if it has been less than 60 days since it was completed. If your registration status has changed since your verification was completed (for example, you have renewed or resigned your registration with CNO), then this is considered a new request and a resend is not available.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Accessibility
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/accessibility/
Title: Providing Goods and Services to People with Disabilities

The College of Nurses (CNO) is an organization whose mission is regulating nursing in the public interest. In fulfilling this mission, CNO strives at all times to provide its goods and services in a way that respects the dignity and independence of people with disabilities.

We are committed to providing people with disabilities the same opportunity to access our goods and services and allowing them to benefit from the same services, in the same place and in a similar way as other members of the public.

CNO is committed to excellence in serving all customers including people with disabilities.

1. Communication

CNO will communicate with people with disabilities in ways that take into account their disability. All staff will be trained on how to communicate with people with various types of disabilities. CNO will offer to communicate with people by email or in person if telephone communication is not suitable to the person’s communication needs. Upon request, CNO will consult with the person making the request to provide publications and/or processes for receiving and responding to feedback in accessible formats and with communication supports, dependent upon document specifications. Every effort will be made to ensure that the accessible formats and communication supports provided take into account the person’s accessibility needs due to disability, and are provided at a cost no more than the regular cost charged to other persons.

2. Assistive Devices

CNO will endeavour to provide services to people with disabilities who use assistive devices to access customer service, attend hearings or meetings. CNO will train staff to be familiar with various assistive devices that may be used by customers with disabilities and on how to use the assistive devices that are available on our premises.

3. Use of Service Animals and Support Persons

CNO is committed to welcoming people with disabilities who are accompanied by a service animal to the areas of our premises that are open to the public and other third parties.

CNO is committed to welcoming people with disabilities who are accompanied by a support person. Any person with a disability who is accompanied by a support person will be allowed to enter CNO’s premises with his or her support person.

4. Notice of temporary disruption

CNO will provide notice in the event of a planned or unexpected disruption to the facilities or services usually used by people with disabilities. This notice will include information about the reason for the disruption, its anticipated duration and a description of alternative facilities or services (if available).The notice will be placed at the public entrance, CNO service counter and posted on CNO’s website.

5. Training for Staff

The purpose of the Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities Act, 2005 and the requirements of the customer service standardHow to interact and communicate with people with various types of disabilitiesHow to interact with people with disabilities who use an assistive device or require the assistance of a service animal or a support personAvailability of assistive devices available on CNO premisesWhat to do if a person with a disability is having difficulty in accessing CNO’s servicesCNO’s policies, practices and procedures relating to the customer service standardFurther training will be provided to employees when changes are made to these policies, practices and procedures.

CNO will provide training for its current staff and to new employees when they commence their duties. Training will include:

1. Feedback process

The goal of this policy is to ensure that CNO meets the level of service expected by customers with disabilities. CNO appreciates feedback on how well those expectations are met. Qualified customer service representatives are available to take your questions and feedback in-person, or via:Mail: Accessibility Feedback, College of Nurses of Ontario, 101 Davenport Road, Toronto, Ontario M5R 3P1Email:cno@cnomail.orgSubject: Accessibility feedbackPhone (toll free in Canada): 1-800-387-5526All feedback will be directed to the Manager, Customer Service. Where possible, complaints will be addressed immediately. However, some feedback requires investigation and may require additional time to respond. CNO will acknowledge verbal or telephone feedback within two business days and email or mailed feedback within fifteen business days of receipt. The acknowledgement will indicate when you can expect a response. CNO will endeavour to provide a response in a format accessible to the customer.

2. Modifications to this or other policies

CNO is committed to ensuring that its customer service policy promotes the dignity and independence of all persons with disabilities. Changes will not be made to this policy before considering the impact on persons with disabilities. All CNO policies respect and promote the dignity and independence of people with disabilities.

3. Questions about this policy

This policy exists to achieve service excellence to customers with disabilities. Questions about this policy may be directed to the Manager, Customer Service.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Contact Us
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/what-is-cno/contact-cno/
Title: Contact Us

In the interest of public health and safety due to the COVID-19 virus, our building is currently closed. We will be available online or by telephone during this time.

Monday – Friday, 8:30 a.m. – 5 p.m.

Monday – Friday, 8:30 a.m. – 4:30 p.m.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: 
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/
Title: Protect the Public

If you have a serious concern about a nurse’s practice, we need to hear about it. When we are informed, we can take the steps necessary to protect patients’ safety.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Make a Complaint
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/making-a-complaint-public/
Title: Make a Complaint

The following information is to helpmembers of the publicwho want to make a complaint about a nurse’s practice or conduct. If you are an employer, facility operator or health professional, please follow the instructions forfiling a report.

Before you make a complaint to CNO, you may wish to discuss your concerns directly with the nurse or the employer.

Read theAddressing Complaints at the College of Nurses of Ontarioguide which includes helpful information on completing the form.

Please fill out the onlineMake a Complaint form. You will need to include details about your complaint, including the date, the nurse and the facility. Having this information on hand will make it easier to complete the form.

CNO may need to obtain the patient’s personal health information, such as medical records, while investigating the complaint. We will only request records that are relevant to the complaint.

If you are the patient who received the nursing care identified in the complaint, please complete the Patient Consent for Release of Personal Health Information section located at the end of the form. This will help us in moving forward with your complaint. Please note, you are not required to sign the consent section in order to submit your complaint.

If you are completing the form on behalf of someone else, such as a family member, please ask them to complete the consent section.

Once you have completed the form, save it as a PDF document and email it toPublicComplaints@cnomail.org.

We will email you to acknowledge that we received your complaint.

If you have questions about the process or the form, please:

emailPublicComplaints@cnomail.orgcall 416-963-7503 (toll-free in Canada 1877-963-7503)

CNO is committed toexcellence in serving people with disabilities. Please contact us for more information or to request support in filing a complaint.

Respect is the foundation of our complaints process. We will treat you with respect, dignity and patience, and we expect the same in return. We know this is an emotional experience, but please be mindful of your behaviour and how you’re treating others when communicating with CNO staff.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: File a Report
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/
Title: File a Report

This information is not intended as legal advice. You are encouraged to seek legal advice and/orcontact CNOif you have any questions about reporting.

If you are a member of the public and you wish to make a complaint about a nurse's conduct, please follow the instructions formaking a complaint.

I have a concern about a nurse that needs to be reported:File a ReportI have a concern about a nurse, but I'm not sure if I should report it.Read the Reporting Guide

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Reporting Guide
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/reporting-guide/
Title: Reporting Guide

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: What to Report
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/reporting-guide/what-to-report/
Title: What to Report

CNO’s mandate is to protect the public. We can achieve this by partnering with employers, facility operators, nurses and those who work with nurses. Patient safety is a collective responsibility. We need you to send us a report when you believe a nurse poses a serious risk of harm to patients.

This chart includes legal reporting requirements under theRegulated Health Professions Act. We also want you to report to CNO if you have a serious concern about a nurse’s practice.

Other legislation and practice settings may require additional reports, such as reporting requirements under theFixing Long-Term Care Actand thePersonal Health Information Protection Act.

This chart is intended only as a summary. If you have questions about whether to report a nurse’s conduct, please contact CNO or seek legal advice.

File your report now

If you have concerns about the nurse in relation to patient safety, please submit your report immediately. When there is a legal requirement to report under theRegulated Health Professions Act, you must do so within 30 days of the incident. In any event, we encourage you to submit the report as quickly as possible.

Labour relations (for example, workload issues and nurse-patient ratios)Health care professionals who are not nurses (for example, reports for an occupational therapist or physician)Concerns about health care facilities

These issues are better handled by the workplace, a nursing union, association or the appropriate regulatory body. If your issue with a nurse falls under one of these categories, talk to the appropriate person in your workplace.

If you’re not sure whether your issue is something CNO can address, please contact legal counsel and/orcontact CNO.

File your report now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: What Do You Need to Include in Your Report?
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/reporting-guide/what-do-you-need-to-include-in-your-report/
Title: What Do You Need to Include in Your Report?

File your report now

When you complete the reporting form, you need to include details of the incident(s). Ask yourself:

What happened?When and where did the incident(s) occur?Who was involved in the incident(s)?When were the incident(s) discovered or identified?How were the incident(s) discovered or identified?Who has direct knowledge of the incident(s)?

You will also need:

The address of the facility where the incident(s) occurredContact information for the person(s) who has knowledge of the incident(s) and the nurse involvedThe name and employment information (if you know it) of the nurse who is the subject of the report

We call the Contact Person listed on the form once we receive the report, to request additional evidence. This may include the letter of termination, if the nurse’s employment was terminated as a result of the incident(s).

File your report now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nurses’ Professional Accountability in Reporting
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/reporting-guide/nurses-professional-accountability-in-reporting/
Title: Nurses’ Professional Accountability in Reporting

File your report now

Nurses have a professional accountability to act in the best interests of patients. As a nurse, you are in a position of trust. You are well-placed to notice harmful behaviour by another nurse, and your first priority is to protect the patient.

Your accountability is to speak up in the interest of patients, and to protect them from harm. This accountability is fundamental to nursing practice and is found in:

Entry to Practice competenciesCode of ConductProfessional Standards, Revised 2002Therapeutic Nurse Client Relationship, Revised 2006

Nurses are also legally obligated to report certain conduct to CNO, including suspectedsexual abuseof a patient by a nurse.

With your report, CNO can evaluate the level of risk associated with the nurse’s behaviour and take the appropriate steps to protect the public.

A nurse practicing in Ontario is required to report certain information about themselves to CNO; this is called “self-reporting.” A nurse is required to self-report to CNO if they:

have been charged with any offencehave been found guilty of any offencehave a finding of professional negligence and/or malpracticehave a finding of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity, or any similar finding in relation to the practice of nursing or any other professionare the subject of a current investigation, inquiry or proceeding for professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity or any similar investigation or proceeding in relation to the practice of nursing in another jurisdiction or any other profession

If a nurse receives an absolute or conditional discharge instead of a conviction from a criminal offence, the nurse must still self-report to CNO. A nurse must self-report even if they are pardoned.

Nurses must self-report as soon as possible, but no more than 30 days from the date of the finding or initiation of a proceeding. They use theSelf-Reporting form.

If you have concerns about an applicant registering with CNO, including nursing students,emailthe Entry-to-Practice team, or call 416 963-7645.

File your report now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Legal Obligations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/reporting-guide/legal-obligations/
Title: Legal Obligations

File your report now

Employers, facility operators and nurses have certain legal obligations to report information to CNO. If you are sending a report to CNO in accordance with a legal obligation, you should send it as soon as possible, but no more than 30 days after the incident. If you miss the 30-day window, please still send us the report as quickly as possible.

Sexual abuseTerminations, or the nurse’s resignation in lieu of terminationRevocations, suspensions, or restrictions on a nurse’s privileges

In the context of regulated health care professionals, the term “sexual abuse” has a specific legal meaning. It is not the same as the criminal act of sexual assault, which refers to a sexual act without consent. For a regulated health professional, any sexual or romantic relationship with a patient, even if it is perceived to be or actually is consensual, is considered abusive. As soon as a nurse engages professionally with a patient, they have established a therapeutic relationship, where the components of trust, respect, empathy, professional intimacy and power are present. This therapeutic patient relationship exists no matter the context or length of the interaction.

A person is considered to be a patient for a period of one year following the termination of their therapeutic relationship. A nurse must not have a sexual or romantic relationship with the patient during that year. The nurse is responsible for establishing and maintaining the limits or boundaries in the therapeutic nurse-patient relationship.

Sexual abuse of a patient occurs when a nurse:

has physical sexual relations with a patienttouches a patient in a sexual manner (for example, touching a patient’s genitals when it is not required in caring for the patient)behaves in a sexual manner toward a patient (for example, touching a patient’s shoulder or hand unnecessarily and in a manner that implies a sexual interest in the patient)makes remarks of a sexual nature to a patient (for example, commenting on the size of a patient’s breasts or genitals)

Nurses, other health care professionals, nurse employers, or individuals who operate a facility where nurses work, are legally required to report any suspected sexual abuse by a nurse to CNO.

In your report, you can only include the patient’s name if you obtain the patient’s written consent to share it (or the consent of the patient’s representative, if the patient is incapable). If the patient has not consented in writing, the patient’s name must not be included in the report.

A person or facility may be fined if they don’t make a report relating to sexual abuse. Individuals may be fined up to $50,000, while corporations may be fined up to $200,000.

Employers are legally required to submit a report to CNO when they terminate a nurse for reasons of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity. Employers are also required to submit a report if the nurse resigns in lieu of being terminated.

Employers can submit the report as soon as possible, but no more than 30 days after terminating the nurse or the nurse resigns in lieu of termination. The report must include reasons for the termination of employment.

A person or facility may be fined if they don’t make a report relating to a nurse’s termination. Individuals may be fined up to $50,000, while corporations may be fined up to $200,000.

Employers are legally required to submit a report to CNO when they revoke, suspend or place restrictions on a nurse’s privileges for reasons of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity.

Employers can submit the report as soon as possible, but no more than 30 days after the nurse’s privileges are revoked, suspended or restricted. The report must include reasons for the revocation, suspension or restrictions imposed on the nurse’s privileges.

A person or facility may be fined if they don’t make a report relating to the revocation, suspension or restriction of a nurse’s privileges. Individuals may be fined up to $50,000, while corporations may be fined up to $200,000.

File your report now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: What Does CNO Do When We Receive a Report?
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/reporting-guide/what-does-cno-do-when-we-receive-a-report/
Title: What Does CNO Do When We Receive a Report?

File your report now

We conduct a preliminary investigation on every report we receive. During this investigation, we typically interview at least one individual at the facility named in the report. We also analyze the level of risk a nurse’s practice poses to the public based on the information provided. Once the preliminary investigation is completed, the investigator prepares a report for CNO’s Executive Director.

CNO’s Executive Director reviews the report along with any information about the nurse that we may have received previously (for example, from an earlier employer’s report or a previous patient complaint). The Executive Director assesses the level of risk created by the nurse’s practice, and determines an appropriate regulatory response. There are a number of options available, includingremedial options, a full investigation or a hearing before CNO’s Discipline Committee. Most cases can be appropriately dealt with without a hearing.

The timeline of the process varies based on a number of factors. The most important factor is the investigator’s assessment of the level of risk a nurse poses to patients.

Legislation requires the reporting process to be confidential. You can find any information about a nurse’s practice that the legislation permits us to share on our public register,Find a Nurse.

File your report now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Glossary
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/reporting-guide/glossary/
Title: Glossary

File your report now

An offence is a breach of law that is prosecuted in a court. This includes any offence in any jurisdiction.

A facility operator is the individual who operates a facility where one or more nurses practice. Since most organizations employ nurses directly, a facility operator and nurse employer are typically the same person.

This term refers to circumstances in which a nurse is also a member of another profession in Ontario or any other jurisdiction, and a disciplinary, incapacity or similar proceeding determines they committed professional misconduct, are incompetent or incapacitated, or makes any similar finding.

When you self-report a finding from another profession or jurisdiction, the report must contain:

your namethe nature and a description of the offence or findingthe date the proceeding began and the finding was madethe name and location of the court or regulatory body that is holding the proceeding or made the findingthe status of any appeal initiated about the finding made against you

Nurses are required to file an additional report to CNO if an appeal changes the status of a finding. This report must not contain information that violates any publication ban that a court imposes during the proceedings.

Professional negligence or malpractice findings arise from circumstances in which patients sue health care professionals to receive compensation for substandard care. A nurse is required to self-report if a civil court has made a finding that the nursing care they provided was professionally negligent.

The requirement to self-report includes all findings of guilt for any offence, including but not limited to offences under theCriminal Code, theFood and Drugs Act, and theControlled Drugs and Substances Act, and offences under provincial laws.

If a nurse receives an absolute or conditional discharge instead of a conviction, the nurse must still self-report to the College. A nurse must self-report even if the nurse has been pardoned.

This term refers to circumstances in which a nurse is also a member of any other profession (such as a midwife or lawyer) in Ontario or any other jurisdiction, and is involved in a current investigation, inquiry or proceeding for professional misconduct, incapacity or any similar investigation or proceeding, and that matter is not yet decided.

File your report now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Remedial Options
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/reporting-guide/remedial-options/
Title: Remedial Options

File your report now

CNO conducts a preliminary investigation on every report we receive. We determine an appropriate regulatory response based on the level of risk created by the nurse’s practice. When the risk is low, the matter is resolved through remedial options: Reflection-based strategies to ensure public protection. In most cases, the remedial action appropriately addresses the risk presented by the nurse’s practice.

File your report now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Reporting Scenarios
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employers-nurses/mandatory-reporting-scenarios/
Title: Reporting Scenarios

The following scenarios are designed to provide guidance around circumstances in which employers are required to make a report to the College.

Brenda, a nurse on an ICU, is suspected by her manager of having a drug abuse problem and of diverting medication from the unit for her own use. Brenda frequently asks co-workers to co-sign for wastage they have not witnessed. Her clients are treated with higher dosages of PRN pain medication than other nurses’ clients on the unit. She primarily works night shifts, takes lengthy breaks and has taken above-average sick time. Her manager has noticed that Brenda is loud and boisterous one moment, and withdrawn the next. In addition, Brenda’s partner has expressed concerns to the manager about Brenda’s health. When asked, Brenda denied that she has any health issues. Does the facility operator have an obligation to report the manager’s concerns to the College?

It is mandatory for a facility operator to report to the College when there are reasonable grounds to believe that a nurse is incapacitated. "Incapacitated" means that the member has a physical or mental condition, and the disorder affects the member’s ability to practise safely. In the preceding scenario, there are several indications that Brenda may have a health condition affecting her practice. The facility should determine if these indicators suggest that Brenda meets both requirements of the definition of incapacitated: (1) that she has a condition or disorder and (2) that her practice warrants some restrictions. Brenda does not need to admit that she is incapacitated. Nor does the facility operator have to “prove” the concerns are true before the obligation to report arises. After the report is filed, the College will assess the information and determine the appropriate regulatory action. If further inquiries regarding Brenda’s health are appropriate, the information will be reviewed by the Inquiries, Complaints and Reports Committee (ICRC).

Paul, a nurse at a retirement facility, is being treated for bipolar disorder. The owner of the facility has never had any concerns with Paul’s practice, conduct, or his relationships with his nursing colleagues or clients. Paul has had some short-term absences, which were supported by his physician, but he has always returned to work in good health. However, the facility operator wonders if he is required to report Paul’s condition even though there have been no practice issues.

There are two components to the definition of incapacity in theRegulated Health Professional Act, 1991:

the member must have a physical or mental condition;andthe condition must warrant restrictions (or a prohibition) on the member’s practice.

In this case, Paul’s health condition has not affected his nursing practice. Paul also removes himself from practice when necessary; therefore, the facility likely has no reason to believe that he is incapacitated as defined in the legislation and the College would not expect a report.

Clarice, the clinical manager of a neuroscience unit in a large acute care hospital, recently hired a new nurse, Danielle, who has extensive experience in long-term care settings. Danielle’s therapeutic skills are extremely strong, but she struggles with certain aspects of medication administration. Clarice meets with Danielle and together they develop a learning plan to address the areas of concern. Unfortunately, Danielle’s near-miss errors continue. Clarice decides that Danielle must be paired with a more senior nurse on the unit, and informs the facility operator of the steps she has taken to have Danielle supervised. The facility operator then reports Danielle’s situation to the College.

Facility operators are required to report to the College when there is reason to believe that a nurse who practises at the facility is incompetent. The definition of incompetence includes three key components:

it must relate to the nurse’s professional care of a patient;the nurse must display a lack of knowledge, skill or judgment; andthe deficiencies must be of a nature or to an extent that demonstrates that the nurse is unfit to continue to practise, or that their practice should be restricted.

In this case, Danielle’s deficiencies in the areas of medication administration are of a degree that her employer has placed limitations on her ability to practise independently. Further, it appears that, at this time, the remedial measures have not resulted in significant improvement.

Stacy is a new graduate nurse working in the general medicine unit. She has been working on a probationary basis for the past three months. During this time, Stacy has made several serious medication errors. Despite going through remediation and working buddied shifts with senior nurses, Stacy recently made another medication error. Stacy takes accountability for her errors and states that she sometimes has difficulty concentrating. Her employer decides to terminate Stacy due to her unsafe practice, but does not want to report her to CNO out of fear that it may jeopardize her nursing career. What should the employer do?

Under theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991,employers are obligated to report to CNO the termination or the intent to terminate a nurse’s employment for reasons of professional misconduct, incapacity or incompetence.

Stacy’s employer is required to alert CNO that Stacy is not practicing safely and report details about her termination. After receiving the report, CNO will complete an initial assessment. Once this process is complete, CNO’s Executive Director reviews the report along with any other information gathered about Stacy. The Executive Director assesses the level of risk to the public and determines an appropriate regulatory response.

It is important to recognize that the intent of mandatory reporting is not to punish nurses, but to ensure public safety within a framework that supports nurses to return to safe practice where possible. In the event of an investigation, the information will be reviewed by theInquiries Complaints Resolution Committee(ICRC).

The manager was informed by the day shift nurse that a patient had told her that the night nurse, Andrew, had touched her inappropriately while providing care. Andrew was immediately put on leave pending an investigation. Andrew has been with the facility for close to a decade and this is the first complaint a patient has ever made about his practice or conduct. Andrew’s most recent performance reviews even note that he is an excellent nurse who is a strong advocate for his patients. Does a report have to be made before the employer’s investigation is completed? What if the employer’s investigation finds no cause for concern?

All members of regulated health professions, including employers and nurses, have an obligation to report to the relevant regulatory body if there are grounds to believe that a patient has been sexually abused by a health care professional. This means that if you have received information from any source that a patient described a specific incident of sexual abuse, then you have a mandatory reporting obligation to the CNO.

Reporting should be not delayed as the obligation to report is not dependent on the outcome of the facility or employer investigation. In making a report to the College, you are not determining that sexual abuse has occurred; you are reporting that it may have occurred. It is the College's obligation to assess and determine the appropriate response to the reported information, in the public interest.

An Executive Director of a community hospital recently discovered that a nurse on the step-down cardiac unit has started a relationship with her patient. The Executive Director has obtained screenshots of their interactions on social media. The nurse denies this relationship as does the patient. What is the Executive Director’s accountability as this nurse’s employer and the facility operator?

According to theProtecting Patients Act, 2017 (Bill 87), any sexual contact between a nurse and a patient or former patient within one-year following the end of the therapeutic nurse-client relationship is sexual abuse. It does not matter if the patient consented to the sexual acts. This accountability is also outlined in theCode of Conduct.

Facility operators and other regulated health professionals are accountable for reporting incidents of sexual abuse to CNO within 30 days. In this case, the Executive Directorhas a legal obligation to report to CNO within 30 days of receiving information that a nurse has sexually abused a client.

A nursing home administrator received several complaints from patients and staff that Nurse Jim is rude and disrespectful. Jim is otherwise competent in his clinical practice. The nursing home administrator asks Jim to complete a learning plan and review the practice standards,Professional StandardsandTherapeutic Nurse Client Relationship. There is no intention of terminating Jim. Is there an obligation for the nursing home administrator to report Jim’s unprofessional behavior to CNO?

Whilereportingobligations are clear, it is sometimes difficult to decide if other concerns should be reported to CNO. Employers are responsible for determining if remediation is warranted and should assess the outcomes. If concerns remain, however, it may be appropriate to submit a report to CNO.

Although rude and disrespectful behavior does not fall under the requirements of mandatory reporting (unless the nurse has been terminated), Jim’s behavior does not align with nurses’ accountabilities to conduct themselves in ways that promote respect for the profession and provide the best possible care for patients. These accountabilities are outlined in theCode of Conductand theProfessional Standards, Revised 2002. In this case, the nursing home administrator may file a non-mandatory report to CNO.

All reports, including non-mandatory reports, are reviewed by CNO’s Executive Director who will assess the level of risk the reported incidents could pose to the public and will determine an appropriate regulatory response.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Confirm a Nurse’s Status
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/confirm-a-nurses-membership-status/
Title: Confirm a Nurse’s Status

Find a Nurseis an easy-to-use online Register that provides information to the public about nurses in Ontario. It lets you search for information about nurses using first or last names, facility names or registration numbers. Every nurse registered in Ontario has a profile on Find a Nurse.

Details about the information contained onFind a Nurse.

Please contact the College'sCustomer Service Centreif you have any questions, or cannot access Find a Nurse, the College's Register.

Questions or concerns aboutunregistered practitionersor reporting should be forwarded to the College's Investigator-on-Call (416 963-7504; toll-free in Canada 1 877 963-7504) orinvestigations-intake@cnomail.org.

The College'sNurse Renewal Checkservice offers organizations the opportunity to receive information about the registration status of all their nursing staff with just one request. The service is available to year-round.

Nurse Renewal Check is a particularly useful tool for employers who employ 50 or more nurses, but it is available to all employers.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nurse Renewal Check
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/confirm-a-nurses-membership-status/nurse-renewal-check/
Title: Nurse Renewal Check

Nurse Renewal Checkis a service provided by CNO for nursing employers, facility operators or anyone else who needs to  have the membership status of nurses they employ on a full-time, part-time, casual or contractual basis quickly and efficiently checked.

It is an efficient alternative to you having to manually review each nurse’s membership status by phone or using, the public RegisterFind a Nurse, making it ideal for organizations that employ a large number of nurses.

Increased efficiency.You can confirm the registration status of nurses in one easy step.Focused follow-up.You can follow up with only those nurses who have registration issues (suspensions, revocations, or terms, conditions or limitations on their certificates of registration).Improved risk management.You will quickly know which nurses are registered to practice and who has had their registration suspended or revoked, or has terms, conditions or limitations in effect on their membership. This helps you to schedule staff appropriately.Enhanced working relationships.In some cases, you can work with nurses to resolve identified issues.Public protection.You can identify quickly anyone whose CNO membership has been suspended or revoked, or who is an unregistered practitioner.

CNO provides you with a spreadsheet to complete with each nurse’s information. We then use this information to confirm whether each nurse is eligible to practice in Ontario. We will inform you if any of those listed have had their CNO membership suspended or revoked, or if they have terms, conditions or limitations in effect on their membership.

Questions?Contact the CNO atnurserenewalcheck@cnomail.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Discipline Hearings
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/hearing-schedule/
Title: Discipline Hearings

Hearings are open to the public.

Using film, photographic or any other video-recording equipment is prohibited during the hearing.Audio recorders are permitted for the purpose of note-taking only, and not for broadcast.Hearing dates can change at any time.Before coming to CNO, we advise you to check the schedule below to find out if dates have changed. A hearing may start and then be adjourned on the scheduled hearing date.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Discipline Decisions
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/discipline-decisions/
Title: Discipline Decisions

CNO publishes the results of hearings held by its Discipline Committee. Full-text versions of these decisions can be found under the member's profile onFind A Nurse.

Discipline Committee decisions are also searchable onCanLII, a publicly available database containing legal decisions.

Learn more about theDiscipline CommitteeandDiscipline hearings.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Unregistered Practitioners
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/unregistered-practitioners/
Title: Unregistered Practitioners

From time to time, the College of Nurses receives reports that individuals who are not nurses may be seeking employment in nursing or holding themselves out as persons qualified to practise in Ontario as a nurse, Registered Nurse, Registered Practical Nurse, or Nurse Practitioner.

Employers are strongly encouraged to useFind a Nurseto verify the membership status of every nurse they employ directly or through an agency.

The following names represent only those individuals who have come to the attention of the College.Contact the Collegeif you are aware of any of these individuals actively seeking employment or working in the nursing profession.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Health Professional Corporation
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/health-professional-corporation/
Title: Health Professional Corporation

If you are a self-employed nurse in independent practice, you have options for incorporating your own business. These include incorporating with the Ontario or federal government. As a nurse, you also have the option of setting up a Health Professional Corporation with CNO.

Regardless of which option you choose, we recommend you discuss your situation with an accountant or lawyer to determine the best choice for you.

As a nurse, you have the option of setting up a Health Professional Corporation with CNO. It is not a requirement, but if you intend to set up a Health Professional Corporation you will need to be incorporated with the Ontario government.

The following FAQs help you understand the process of applying for a Health Professional Corporation through CNO. They don’t apply if you intend to incorporate your business only with the Ontario government.

No, you are not required to also set up a Health Professional Corporation with CNO, this is simply an option. We recommend you discuss your situation with an accountant or lawyer to determine the best choice for you.

We cannot provide you with advice about registering a business as a sole proprietorship. We recommend you discuss your situation with an accountant or lawyer to determine the best choice for you.

The benefit is you receive a Certificate of Authorization issued by CNO. This certificate confirms registration of your Health Professional Corporation.

You still remain a registered nurse with CNO and therefore must meet all requirements of your practicing class:

renew annuallyuphold CNO’s practice standards and guidelinescomplete your annual Quality Assurance requirementscomply with the reporting requirementshold Professional Liability Protection (PLP)

Fill out the Certificate of Authorization application form and submit it to CNO.

Yes. Please see ourFees pagefor related costs.

Yes, provincial legislation imposes a number of restrictions, including:

only nurses registered with CNO can be shareholders in the corporationthe corporation’s officers and directors must be shareholdersthe corporation’s name must include:the last name of one or more shareholder(s), as listed on the CNO public Register, calledFind a Nurse. You can include first names or initials if you wantthe words “Nursing” and “Professional Corporation” or “Société Professionnelle”the name of the corporation cannot be a numbered company. For example, 1234567 Ontario Inc. For example, the final name could be Jones, Smith & Partners Nursing Professional Corporationthe corporation can only practice nursing care or ancillary services. For example, health care or foot carethe corporation is subject to CNO regulatory processes

The corporation’s shareholders are responsible for upholding CNO standards of practice; to practice nursing according to CNO’sIndependent Practicepractice guideline, especially in relation to business advertising. They also remain accountable to CNO for their professional conduct.

Yes. The name and address of your corporation, the names of all shareholders and any revocations of the corporation’s Certificate of Authorization are posted on CNO’s public Register,Find a Nurse.

Yes. Anyone can make a complaint against a nurse or a corporation; CNO investigates all complaints. Consumers can also contact the Ministry of Government and Consumer Services for concerns about a corporation’s business practices.

You must renew your Certificate of Authorization each year, in addition to paying an annual renewal fee. If the shareholders change, you must inform CNO within 10 days.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Preventing Harm
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/
Title: Preventing Harm

We know most nurses provide quality care and contribute to patient safety. However, we also know that a small number of nurses intentionally harm their patients. This can have lasting effects on a patient’s health.

Being aware of this possibility may lead to early detection and prevention. Evidence shows knowledge is key to preventing this harm.

CNO provides tools and resources to help prevent harm against patients. To learn more, select an item from the list you see here.

Intentional HarmThe Rare but Real: Intentional harm to patients videos were developed to raise awareness about the possibility of nurses intentionally harming patients.Sexual Abuse of PatientsSexual relations between a nurse and patient are always unethical and abusive, and are considered a serious breach of trust. The law recognizes the significant harm that results from the sexual abuse of a patient by a health care professional.Sexual Abuse PreventionPatient sexual abuse by a nurse causes significant harm. The abuse can have lasting effects on a patient’s health and well-being. It can also seriously effect a patient’s caregiver, family and community.One Is One Too ManyDetails about One Is One Too Many, the College’s abuse prevention program.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Intentional Harm
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/intentional-harm/
Title: Intentional Harm

TheRare but Real: Intentional harm to patientsvideos were developed to raise awareness about the possibility of nurses intentionally harming patients. We know most nurses provide quality care and contribute to patient safety. However, we also know from the research that a small number of nurses intentionally harm their patients.

We have included related resources, and guided questions to help you start and continue a dialogue on the topic. The more we talk about it, the better we might be in detecting and preventing harm to patients.







Sexual Abuse PreventionEmployer's Toolkit: Sexual Abuse PreventionFile a ReportOne is One too ManySexual Abuse of Patients

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Sexual Abuse of Patients
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-of-patients/
Title: Sexual Abuse of Patients

Sexual abuse of a patient by a nurse causes significant harm. The abuse can have lasting effects on a patient’s health and well-being. To help patient’s cope with the abuse’s impact, funding is available for therapy.

Nurses are responsible for establishing and maintaining appropriate boundaries within their professional relationships with patients. When receiving care from a nurse, patients can expect their nurse to be professional, respectful, knowledgeable, skillful and ethical. Nurses are not allowed to engage in romantic or sexual relationships with their patients. A sexual relationship between a nurse and patient is unethical, abusive and against the law.

In 2019, CNO completed aresearch studyto better understand what contributes to nurses sexually abusing patients. For example, we found that vulnerable patients can be targeted. We are using findings from our research to develop interventions to prevent nurses from sexually abusing patients.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Sexual Abuse Prevention
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/
Title: Sexual Abuse Prevention

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Introduction
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/introduction/
Title: Introduction

It is CNO’s role to respond to complaints and reports of sexual abuse by nurses[i]. We investigate each allegation of sexual abuse with a commitment to provide sensitive and respectful support to victims involved in our processes. We created theSexual Abuse of Patientsweb page to provide more information on what to do if you or a family member has experienced sexual abuse by a nurse.

To enhance public safety, we continue to look for ways to improve how prevent and respond to incidences of patient sexual abuse. In 2019, we completed a research study to better understand what contributes to nurses sexually abusing patients. We are using the findings from our research to develop interventions to prevent nurses from sexually abusing patients. For example, we learned there is often a progression of behaviours before sexual abuse happens. Stopping those behaviours can prevent sexual abuse.

We chose to do this work because we believe that even one case of sexual abuse is one too many. If we can understand more about what leads to patient sexual abuse, we can do more to prevent it.

We look forward to working with our partners in safety, including nurses, educators, employers and other regulators to eradicate sexual abuse.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: What is sexual abuse?
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/what-is-sexual-abuse/
Title: What is sexual abuse?

For nurses and their patients, the term “sexual abuse” has a specific legal meaning defined under theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991.

Sexual abuse of a patient occurs when a nurse:

has physical sexual relations with a patienttouches a patient in a sexual manner (for example, touching a patient’s genitals when it is not required in caring for the patient)behaves in a sexual manner toward a patient (for example, touching a patient’s shoulder or hand unnecessarily and in a manner that implies a sexual interest in the patient)makes remarks of a sexual nature to a patient (for example, commenting on the size of a patient’s breasts or genitals)

Patient sexual abuse is different from the criminal act of sexual assault, which refers to a sexual act without consent. In the context of a nurse-patient relationship, it does not matter if the patient consents; it is always sexual abuse.

Sexual Abuse True or False

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Definition of a "Patient"
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/definition-of-a-patient/
Title: Definition of a "Patient"

An individual is considered to be a nurse’s “patient” for a period of one year following the end of the professional nurse-patient relationship. This means, if a nurse begins a romantic relationship with an individual to whom they provided care to a year ago, the nurse’s conduct would be sexual abuse.

In the context of sexual abuse, a professional nurse-patient relationship exists if the nurse:

has direct interaction with an individual for the purposes of providing care;receives payment from an individual for a health care service;contributes to the health record for the individual;recommends a health care service the individual consents to; orprescribes the individual a drug for which a prescription is needed

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: CNO research on sexual abuse by Ontario nurses
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/cno-research-on-sexual-abuse/
Title: CNO research on sexual abuse by Ontario nurses

CNO used a risk-based regulation framework to guide the research. Risk-based regulation is a proactive approach in harm prevention. It focuses on public safety by identifying specific and relevant risks of harm, and developing interventions so that future risks do not result in actual harms.

We began our research by looking at the common trends among complaints and reports received by CNO related to sexual abuse. We also gathered evidence from literature reviews and interviews with sexual abuse experts.

Between the years of 2000 and 2017, CNO received complaints and reports on 280 sexual abuse complaints and reports. However, occurrences of sexual abuse during this timeframe are likely higher because many patients do not report it. This aligns with Canadian research on sexual violence, which finds that few victims disclose or formally report their experiences; many do not report because of stigma, embarrassment, self-blame or fear of not being believed.[1]

From these matters, we collected information to identify common trends on patient sexual abuse. For example, we looked at the dates of nurses’ initial registration with CNO and their history of conduct matters. We also looked at the age of the patients and any particular vulnerabilities they had. For example, not being aware of their surroundings because of a health condition or a medication they were taking.  Information about the incidents were also collected, such as the care settings, staffing levels and types of sexual abuse.

The most common areas of nursing practice where reported sexual abuse occurred were:

mental health (28%)geriatrics (11%)home care (8%)

The data in the table below shows the types of sexual abuse that occurred in the 280 matters (some matters involved more than one type of sexual abuse):

Our research also showed that nurses commonly used grooming techniques to draw victims in. Grooming refers to a preparatory stage, in which the offender will “prepare their potential victims to accept the sexual contact.”[2]The offender does this by building a trusted relationship and desensitizing the patient to minor boundary violations, which then grow over time. Research on patient sexual abuse shows that the abuse rarely occurs spontaneously. Offenders engage in behaviours “designed to develop a relationship with their victim prior to the initiation of sexual contact”[3]. The goal of this approach is to foster the victim’s cooperation and silence when the sexual abuse begins to occur.

In CNO’s research, the most common grooming techniques are shown in the table below (some nurses used more than one technique).

Patients who reported sexual abuse to CNO said they felt “violated,” “vulnerable,” “ashamed” and “confused.” Patients have the right to be treated in a professional, respectful, knowledgeable, skillful and ethical manner. These rights are not met when a nurse has a sexual relationship with a patient.

While most nurses do not harm their patients, the fact that any sexual abuse by nurses exists tells us that we need more education and prevention measures.

For more information on our research findings, read item 3.7 (page 155) of CNO’s June 2019 Council briefing note.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Professional boundaries
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/professional-boundaries/
Title: Professional boundaries

In the nurse-patient relationship, nurses hold a position of power by virtue of having:

professional knowledge and skills patients rely on for their well-beingaccess to patients' bodies while performing intimate physical examsaccess to patient’s personal health informationa position of authority

Maintaining professional boundaries is always the nurse’s responsibility. This includes physical boundaries. Because of the power imbalance that exists between the patient and the nurse,anysexual or romantic relationship a nurse has with a patient is abuse and professional misconduct.

A nurse is also not allowed to engage in a sexual or romantic relationship with a patient for one year after the end of the professional relationship with the patient. This means, if a nurse begins a romantic relationship with an individual to whom they provided care to six months ago, the nurse’s conduct would be sexual abuse

There are serious consequences by engaging in sexual acts with a patient, including the nurse losing their ability to practice nursing in Ontario.

Trust, respect, professional intimacy, empathy and power are the five components inherent to the nurse-patient relationship. When a nurse suspects that she or he is involved in a situation that crosses the boundaries of the therapeutic nurse-client relationship, the nurse needs to take action to maintain or restore the professional boundaries. The primary concern is always for the safety and well-being of the patient.

Nurses manage the boundaries of thetherapeutic relationshipthrough:

self-reflectionestablishing and following a comprehensive plan of caremeeting personal needs (for example, social support, companionship, approval) outside of the therapeutic nurse-patient relationshipexplaining and discussing the meaning of confidentiality with the patientbeing sensitive to the context in which care is provided (for example, in a patient’s home, outside a traditional environment)achieving a clear understanding with the patient about the duration and termination of the relationship.

Nurses are also responsible for helping clients understand when their requests are beyond the limits of that relationship.

Myths about professional boundaries

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Not me: Not my colleague
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/not-me-not-my-colleague/
Title: Not me: Not my colleague

While it may be hard to believe a nurse in your facility could sexually abuse patients, studies show that it can be anyone. Preventing patient sexual abuse includes education and awareness about how the law defines sexual abuse for health care professionals and the behaviours that can lead to sexual abuse.

Many nurses may not be aware that a sexual relationship with a patient is sexual abuse under Ontario law.Even though some actions may seem innocent to a nurse (for example, spending extra time with a patient after shift), multiple gestures similar in nature could be considered a boundary crossing which may lead to sexual abuse. There is also a misunderstanding of the timeframe that someone is considered a “patient” after the therapeutic nurse-patient relationship.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Warning Signs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/warning-signs/
Title: Warning Signs

Boundary violations can lead nurses to sexually abuse patients.  By recognizing warning signs in yourself and colleagues, you can stop the behaviour to prevent it from escalating to sexual abuse.

Here are some warning signs you should pay attention to:

Giving personal contact information to a patientCommunicating electronically with the patient through social media for personal reasonsGiving gifts to patientsPaying special attention to a patient (for example, spending time with the patient outside your shift, or on a break)Discussing personal issues with a patientChanging assignments to care for a specific patientDressing differently for a particular patientFrequently thinking about a particular patientFeeling other members of the team do not understand a specific patientFeeling defensive when someone questions interactions with a specific patientKeeping secrets with the patientA patient is only willing to speak to a particular nurse

Download and print: Warning signs fact sheet

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Patient’s first
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/patients-first/
Title: Patient’s first

While there are particular vulnerabilities that may increase the risk of patient sexual abuse, realistically all patients are vulnerable and can become victims.

Patients who were sexually abused by nurses feel:

ViolatedAssaultedEmbarrassedVulnerableAshamedConfusedDevastated

Health professionals are accountable for putting the needs of patients first. Safe patient care is the only goal of the nurse-patient relationship. It does not matter if the patient appears to consent to sexual activity with a nurse. Although a patient may perceive they are consenting, their vulnerable state, and the power dynamics between nurses and patients, means the patient is not in a position to consent.

Patients have the right to be treated in an ethical, competent and respectful manner at all times.

Download and print: Vulnerable patients fact sheet

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Your well-being matters
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/your-well-being-matters/
Title: Your well-being matters

“Anytime we can listen to true self and give the care it requires, we do it not only for ourselves but for the many others whose lives we touch.”– Parker J. Palmer

Nurses are responsible for maintaining their health.  They seek help if their health affects their ability to practice safely[i]

Your health can affect the care you provide to your patients. Research shows that physical and emotional fatigue can reduce your cognitive functioning including decision-making, memory and attention[ii]. Our personal and professional lives will have ups and downs. It’s important to pause and reflect on whether you feel your physical or mental health is impacting the care you are providing. If it is, it might be time for self-care or to seek professional help.

Some guiding questions to help you reflect include:

What are the current stressors in my life?What strategies can I implement to help cope with these stressors?Am I taking care of myself physically, mentally, and emotionally?How do I currently do to manage stress? Is it effective?

Nurses taking care of themselves not only benefits patients, it benefits nurses with increased job and life satisfaction, relaxation and better physical health[iii].

Strategies to manage stress Include: Mindfulness interventions. You can access a variety of information, including free online apps to guide mindfulness, breathing exercises and meditation.

Building stronger links with your colleagues so you can better support and rely on one another. For example, consider working with your colleagues to develop a self-care education session that can be offered over lunch.Building your social supports.Signing up for workshops such as a stress management workshop.Making changes that would give you the work/life balance you need.Making changes to your diet and physical activity to help cope with stress.Reaching out for counselling, therapy or speaking to your primary care provider to get support recommendations.Approaching theNurse’s Health Program, a new voluntary program that focuses on early identification and referral for treatment of mental health and/or substance use disorders.

Download and print: Self-care fact sheet

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: How to support a patient safety culture
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/how-to-support-a-patient-safety-culture/
Title: How to support a patient safety culture

Culture in health care settings is key to patient safety. Everyone has a role in creating and nurturing an environment where colleagues feel able to speak up about unsafe practice.

How is a patient safety culture environment developed?

Leaders create a blame free environment where staff speak up about patient safety issues with a focus on preventing future issuesLeaders promote trust by implementing teachable moments when they hear of unsafe practice. For example asking staff “how do we learn from this experience” or providing staff educational resources.Leaders support staff who speak up and share information, when appropriate, that led to changes in practicepreventing a similar situation in the future.

If a regulated health care professional or a facility suspects a health care professional may have sexually abused a patient, it is a legal reporting requirement.

Here are some guiding questions you can use to reflect on whether your organizational culture is psychologically safe:

Does your organization make it clear that a patient safety culture matters and is expected??Does your organization emphasise increasing patient safety?Do employees, including management, consistently demonstrate and role model a patient safety culture?Are staff encouraged to bring patient safety issues forward (for example, with colleagues, through an incident reporting system, to management)Is there a safe, convenient way for staff to voice their concerns?Do widely accepted practices in the organization support health and safety?

Download and print: Patient safety culture fact sheet

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Something concerned me. How do I raise it? Who do I tell?
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/something-concerned-me/
Title: Something concerned me. How do I raise it? Who do I tell?

If your concerned about s situation impacting patient safety, it’s your obligation to intervene.  It can be hard to know what information to share with what person. This may be a good topic of conversation within your team or with your manager. Be sure to understand the organizational policy about how patient safety concerns are raised.

Raise concern informally: Do you feel comfortable raising the concern directly to your colleague? Is direct feedback appropriate?

For example, you have worked with colleague for a number of years and have never had concerns regarding their practice. On this occasion you overhear the colleague speaking in a tone to a patient that may be perceived as being harsh. In this situation, you can discuss your thoughts by focusing on the perception of your colleague’s behaviour, rather than on the colleague personally.

Raise concern formally: Escalate concern to a manager.

For example, over the past month you have worked three shifts with Elizabeth, an RN. Each shift you have had to remind Elizabeth to sign for medications she has administered. When you spoke directly to Elizabeth, she acknowledged her oversight and blamed the error on the unit’s busyness. You notice an unresolved pattern in nursing practice, despite direct feedback. In this situation, you can have a conversation with your manager to describe your observations on Elizabeth’s practice.

Raise concern to CNO: Consider your professional accountability as a partner in ensuring public protection.

For example, you recognize your responsibility to ensure quality patient care by assisting nurses in addressing their remedial needs. For instance, you have been working with a nurse over the past several months and despite a variety of attempts to assist the nurse in addressing a competency gap, concerns remain about the nurses' practice.

Legal obligation to report concern to CNO: There are certain situations legally required to be reported directly to CNO. For example, regulated health professions and facilities have an accountability to report suspected sexual abuse.

For example, You and your colleague Jin-Hee, an RN, are friends on social media. You happen to notice pictures Jin-Hee recently posted and recognize Jin-Hee’s companion, David, a recent patient. You are concerned as the pictures indicate a romantic relationship. When you speak to Jin-Hee about your concerns she dismisses them and states, “Don’t worry, David asked me out. I didn’t approach him. Besides, he was discharged three months ago.”

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Case Scenarios
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/
Title: Case Scenarios

The following case scenarios are adapted with permission from the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario (CPSO),Boundaries and Sexual Abuse Case Studies(2018). These case scenarios show the judgement involved in maintaining appropriate boundaries with patients. The cases can be used as a teaching tool for nursing students, nurses and others involved in the profession.

Scenario 1 – Personal needs and interestsScenario 2 – Oversharing personal informationScenario 3 – Accepting giftsScenario 4 – Risk managementScenario 5 - Rural practice and scarcity

Scenario 6 - Incompetent practiceScenario 7 – Legal versus professional and ethical obligationsScenario 8 – Sexualized comments

Scenario 9 – Professionalism and languageScenario 10 – Consent and boundary violationScenario 11 – Colleague’s duty to reportScenario 12 - Determining if a nurse-patient relationship exists (1)Scenario 13 - Determining if a nurse-patient relationship exists  (2)

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 1 - Personal needs and interests
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/personal-needs-interests/
Title: Boundary crossings and violations

Nancy, a registered nurse, is caring for Dan. Nancy discovers they have a lot in common and finds a certain connection with Dan. Nancy finds she cannot stop thinking about Dan, and eventually emails him. They begin to chat over email and, after a month or so, she asks Dan to go to dinner with her. Dan agrees.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 2 - Oversharing personal information
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/oversharing-personal-information/
Title: Boundary crossings and violations

Mrs. Smith goes to see her nurse practitioner, Sandeep, because she is feeling overwhelmed. Mrs. Smith admits she is having marital difficulties with her husband. This is making her feel very anxious and unable to sleep. Sandeep acknowledges that ‘marriages can be hard work’, and begins to tell her about his own prob­lems with his spouse. Sandeep becomes emotional speaking about his spouse, and asks Mrs. Smith if he can take a minute to compose himself. Mrs. Smith comforts Sandeep and says her problems seem insignificant in comparison, so she should just ‘get over it already’. Sandeep says he is running late for his next appointment, and asks Mrs. Smith to reschedule.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 3 - Accepting gifts
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/accepting-gifts/
Title: Boundary crossings and violation

Layla, a registered practical nurse, has been caring for resident, Kate, for many years in a long-term care facility. Kate’s grandson, Ben, has been extremely grateful for Layla’s care with his grandmother. When Ben next visits, he presents Layla with a very expensive bottle of wine to thank her for caring for his grandmother. Layla accepts the gift and says she looks forward to sampling it after work. About a month later, Ben notices that Layla is very busy with other residents and having a difficult time getting in to see his grandmother. He finds this frustrating and tells the charge nurse, “I’m surprised I can’t get timely care from Layla.” The next day, Layla receives extra help from a student nurse so has more availability to see Kate. Ben is so grateful, he brings her another gift when he comes to visit; this time it’s an annual subscription toWine Monthlythat comes with a limited edition set of wine glasses.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 4 - Risk management
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/risk-management/
Title: Boundary crossings and violations

Olivia, a registered practical nurse working in an outpatient mental health program, cares for Bill. Bill has a lot of trust issues, feelings of rejection, and is very emotionally needy. Olivia often allows sessions outside office hours, and they often run late. Olivia drives Bill home in bad weather. One day, Bill asks Olivia to go to a show with him, but Olivia says no, saying this would cross a line. Bill gets upset and accuses her of ‘running hot and cold’.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 5 - Rural practice and scarcity
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/rural-practice/
Title: Boundary crossings and violations

Max has been a nurse practitioner in his community for over 10 years. He is well-known and has a reputation for being very friendly.

Mary is completing a placement on a local farm as part of her veterinary degree requirements near the town. One day she mentions to her supervisor that she has been experiencing pain. When she’s advised to see a health care provider, Mary mentions her family nurse practitioner is in her home town which is over five hours away. Mary’s supervisor recommends she book an appointment with Max. A few days later, Mary reports for her appointment with Max and he welcomes her warmly. Once the appointment has finished, he gives her a hug. Mary leaves his office feeling perplexed; she’s never had a nurse practitioner or any other nurse hug her.

Mary remembers learning about self-regulating health professions and feels that Max’s approach to care is overly familiar. She knows this community needs his expertise and that there are limited nurses and nurse practitioners in the area. She decides to file a report with CNO. Others in town find out that Max has been reported and they are not pleased with Mary’s accusations.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 6 - Incompetent practice
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/incompetent-practice/
Title: Sexual Abuse and duty to report

Brian is a registered nurse who provides psychotherapy to Ms. Khan. Brian mentioned to Ms. Khan that massage is a helpful way to help her connect to him as a RN psychotherapist, and to relax into her memories. Brian frequently massaged Ms. Khan’s body during sessions and would end each session with a long hug.

Ms. Khan had never received psychotherapy before, so she trusted that touching was clinically indicated as part of the therapy. It wasn’t until Ms. Khan discussed her therapy sessions with her friend that she realized it was not the norm for nurses to engage in massage or to hug their patients the way Brian did with her. On reflection, Ms. Khan thought Brian was touching her sexually, realizing that his breathing was laboured as he touched her, and she was extremely embarrassed and upset.

Ms. Khan had a follow-up appointment with her nurse practitioner, Joan, to discuss the progress of her psychotherapy sessions. Joan asks Ms. Khan about her experiences in psychotherapy and whether she feels this type of therapy is helping her. Ms. Khan explains that she is feeling strange about Brian’s use of massage in her therapy and mentions that he often hugs her as well. Hearing Ms. Khan’s account of Brian’s conduct is alarming to Joan who knows how important it is to maintain appropriate boundaries, and that nurses shouldn’t touch patients sexually.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 7 - Legal versus professional
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/legal-vs-professional/
Title: Sexual Abuse and duty to report

Sam and Amy grew up together and have been friends for many years. They both decided to enter the health profession. Amy became a nurse practitioner and Sam became a doctor. They both work in the same clinic in their hometown and have many common patients.

After a few years practicing in the same clinic, Amy becomes aware of an ongoing personal relationship between Sam and a member of their small community. Sam is single and there aren’t many opportunities to click with someone, so Amy is happy for him. One day she sees a woman come in for an appointment with Sam. As the woman goes into the treatment room, the administrative assistant whispers to Amy, “That’s the new woman in Sam’s life”. Amy is concerned and thinks,Sam is dating a patient? He knows better than that… I thought.”

Instead of reporting Sam to the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario, Amy decides to confront her friend. Sam reacts poorly when Amy expresses her concerns over him dating a patient, and states, “What am I supposed to do? There aren’t many options in this small town. Am I supposed to die alone?” Amy understands his frustrations, but she is also aware of their professional and legal obligations to patients. She offers to take on his patient so that Sam can continue to see this woman without being in conflict with the RHPA.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 8 - Sexualized comments
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/sexualized-comments/
Title: Sexual Abuse and duty to report

Barrie is a fourth-year nursing student observing a surgical case with Dr. West. One day, Barrie is observing Dr. West perform surgery. While the patient is under general sedation, Dr. West makes sexualized comments about the patient’s breasts and then fondles them. Barrie is disturbed by what he sees. He knows he should do something but isn’t sure how proceed.

Barrie decides to approach the preceptor he works with. He tells the preceptor, Andy, what he witnessed and asks Andy for advice on how to handle this situation.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 9 - Professionalism and language
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/professionalism-and-language/
Title: Sexual Abuse

Heather, a registered nurse working in an emergency department, examines a male patient who presents with chest pain. Heather asks the patient about his sexual orientation and if he is sexually active. The patient appears to be uncomfortable and says that he has a boyfriend.

Now assume the patient presents in the ER with pain during urination. Heather asks the patient if he is sexually active and if so, the nature of his sexual behaviours. The patient appears to be uncomfortable and says that he has a boyfriend.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 10 - Consent and boundary violation
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/consent-and-boundary-violation/
Title: Sexual Abuse

Ji, a nurse practitioner, treated Mary for four years. Three years into the nurse-patient relationship, Mary began to discuss her romantic feelings for Ji, usually after hours by email and phone.

Mary felt the two women had ‘something special’. They began to date and started a sexual relationship. Within a year, the relationship fell apart and Mary stopped her treatment with Ji. She later filed a complaint with CNO alleging Ji withheld medications after their relationship ended.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 11 - Colleague’s duty to report
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/colleagues-duty-to-report/
Title: Sexual Abuse

A nurse, who also offers psychotherapy, often sees adolescents who are struggling with depression or anxiety. The patients are often shy and slow to open up. The nurse wants to ‘put them at ease’ and so makes a lot of sexualized jokes and comments.

A colleague expresses concern about this behaviour, but the nurse dismisses it: “I’m just trying to ‘connect’ with the teens and this is how they speak to each other.”

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 12 - Determining a nurse-patient relationship
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/s12-determining-if-a-nurse-patient-relationship-exists/
Title: Sexual Abuse

Rogelio is a nurse practitioner in the only hospital in the region. He becomes friendly with a registered practical nurse (RPN) who works at the hospital. Their interactions have only happened on the ward. He considers asking the RPN out for dinner and decides he will when the opportunity arises. As Rogelio is prepping for a clinic, he sees the RPN’s name on his list of patients to see that day.

About a week after seeing her as a patient in the clinic, Rogelio sees the RPN in the nurses’ lounge. He decides to ask her if she would be interested in having dinner with him on Saturday night. She agrees and after having such a lovely time together, they start dating and commence a sexual relationship. She continues to be a patient at the hospital, seeing Rogelio. This means there are times when Rogelio participates in appointments and he is well-acquainted with her chart.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scenario 13 - Determining a nurse-patient relationship exists
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/case-scenarios/s13-determining-nurse-patient-relationship/
Title: Sexual Abuse

Leo is a nurse practitioner (NP) working in a rural community health clinic. He heads to the local bar for a drink and sees Kayla. Kayla was a patient of Leo’s the previous year. Leo is interested in dating her and asks her out for dinner

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Sexual Abuse Prevention Webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/sexual-abuse-prevention-webcast/
Title: Sexual Abuse Prevention Webcast

Our Sexual Abuse Prevention webcast helps educate nurses on what our research has revealed about grooming techniques, maintaining boundaries and the important role nurses have in preventing this patient harm.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Standards & Guidelines
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/standards-and-guidelines/
Title: Standards & Guidelines

CNO provides practice standards and guidelines to support nurses in providing safe and ethical nursing care to the people of Ontario.

Practice standardsoutline the expectations for nurses that contribute to public protection. They inform nurses of their accountabilities and the public of what to expect of nurses. The standards apply to all nurses regardless of their role, job description or area of practice.

Practice guidelines, which often address specific practice-related issues, help nurses understand their responsibilities and how to make safe and ethical decisions in their practice.

The College provides a variety of educational and consultative services – includingwebcasts, andPractice Support-- to help nurses understand the standards and how to apply them to their practice.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Developing Standards
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/standards-and-guidelines/developing-standards/
Title: Developing Standards

To protect the public interest, one of the College’s key functions is to develop, establish and maintain standards of practice.

A number of factors influence their development. These are:

nursing practicelaws and government policysocietal and health care contextpublic confidenceCollege Council and committeesCollege members and stakeholders

A number of principles guide the development process. The standard must:

have an explicitpurposethat aligns with the College’s public interest mandatebeclearand easily understoodberelevantto nursing practice and reflect the generally accepted practice of a competent nursebereliableand produce the intended purpose of public protectionbeflexibleand apply to nurses working in different settings and rolesprovide a benchmark for thelevel of performanceof a competent nursebe able to assess andmeasureperformance

Developing standards is not a linear process. Different activities can occur in a number of phases at once. It is also common to move back and forth among phases.



Conduct ongoing environmental scanning to identify actual or potential risks of nursing practice to the public interest.

Investigate risks and how they can be lessened by collecting comprehensive information including:

environmental scanningCollege dataprofessional networkingliterature, documents and jurisprudence reviewsconsultation with nurses, members of the public and stakeholders

Develop standards based on the best available evidence, with input from members of the public and extensive consultation with nurses, stakeholders and experts.

Council must approve nursing standards.

Publish standards and communicate information to nurses and other stakeholders.

Use different sources of information to ensure the standards achieve their intended purpose and stay relevant to public protection over time.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practice Support FAQs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/ask-practice/
Title: Ask Practice

Ask Practice features questions and answers about a variety of practice-related issues that nurses may face over the course of their careers.

The questions come from nurses and the answers are written by the College’s Practice Support Team. Ask Practice is updated on a regular basis, so come back often to see what new questions have been added to the list. Do you have a practice-related question that isn’t addressed here? Contact the Practice Support Team atpracticesupport@cnomail.org.

Care Transitions: Transfer of AccountabilityClient-centred careCode SilverCommunicating test resultsContinuing CompetenceCommunicating a diagnosisInitiating a packing dressingNurses use of CannabisPerforming frequent client assessmentsRefusing assignments or discontinuing nursing servicesSleeping during shift breaksRisking fatigue by working long hoursUnderstanding your scope of practiceWhat information is required on name tags?Witnessing abuseAccountability to reportAccountabilities during a strike

Authority to initiate intravenous linesDifference between a directive and prescribingCommunicating directivesDo directives expire?Signing for narcotic wastageSigning prescriptions with “as per…”

Accessing client’s health recordsPolice access to health informationMandatory reporting of gunshot woundsOccupational Health Nurses (OHNs) and confidentialityDiscussing clients with colleagues onlineWithholding information/Lockbox provision

Obtaining informed consent

Performing laser therapyDelegationApplying ultrasound in nursing assessments

Authority to use automated external defibrillators (AEDs)Practice settings where health services are routinely performed

Am I practising nursing in my new role?Caring for a family memberMedical leavePSW work as evidence of nursing practice

Co-signing a documentation entryDocumenting AssessmentsDocumenting for unregulated care providersElectronic DocumentationTitle use when working in different rolesUse of Educational Credentials

Can an RN or RPN pronounce death when death has occurred?DNR ordersNP Students and MAID AssessmentsWho can certify death

Accepting gifts from clientsCaring for a friendCommunicating with clients onlineDisagreeing with the Care PlanProviding care to a sexual partnerProfessional versus social relationshipsWhen employer policies conflictWhen patients attempt sexual touching

Administering BotoxRecord keeping - documentationRecord keeping - retentionFeesProducts and Medication

Administering BotoxAdministering methadoneAdministering, distributing and teaching the use of NaloxoneConsiderations when administering cosmetic injectionsEvidence-informed sourcesMedical CannabisMedication samplesNarcotic storage and disposalNo directives for controlled substancesRecommending over-the-counter medicationsWhat patients should consider before getting Botox by a nurse

Assigning, Supervising or Teaching an ActivityCan I register as a psychiatric nurse in Ontario?Complementary TherapiesLeadership in nursing practiceNurses working in different rolesPsychotherapy and the controlled act component of psychotherapySupporting Learners

Working with UCPsWorking with physician assistantsTeaching an unregulated care providerSliding scale insulinCan a UCP or PSW call themselves a nurse?



Providing virtual careNursing accountabilities when working with robotics



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Educational Tools
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/
Title: Educational Tools

The College of Nurses provides a number of educational tools to help nurses and employers understand and apply the standards and guidelines in their day-to-day practice.

The College also offersPractice Supportto help nurses with specific practice-related enquiries.

To learn more about other self-directed tools and resources, select any item from the list you see here.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Learning Modules
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/learning-modules/
Title: Learning Modules

Learning modules are designed to help you understand CNO practice standards and other related documents.

Each self-study learning module contains an introduction, learning objectives, content chapters and additional resources, such as a quiz that you can download and complete.

You can watch these modules at any time. However, viewing a module and completing the quiz is not considered a substitute for reading the practice standard or document.

Watching a learning module is self-directed and anonymous. CNO does not issue certificates for completion.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Consent
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/learning-modules/consent/
Title: Consent

Nurses have professional and legal obligations for obtaining consent. The College'sConsentpractice guideline provides an overview of the major features of the relevant legislation, pertinent definitions and the steps that nurses need to take to obtain consent.

Was this module helpful?Give your feedback.







------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Documentation
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/learning-modules/documentation-2010/
Title: Documentation

Clear, comprehensive and accurate documentation is an integral part of safe and effective nursing practice. Documentation provides a record of the judgment and critical thinking used in professional practice, and provides an account of the nurse’s unique contribution to health care.

TheDocumentationpractice standard describes the expectations for nurses in all practice settings and for all forms of documentation

Was this module helpful?Give your feedback.







Test youself

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Therapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/learning-modules/therapeutic-nurse-client-relationship/
Title: Therapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship

At the core of nursing is the therapeutic nurse-client relationship. The College'sTherapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship, Revised 2006, practice standard describes the expectations for all nurses in establishing, maintaining and terminating a therapeutic relationship.

Was this module helpful?Give your feedback.







------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Temporary Class Learning Module
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/learning-modules/temporary-class/
Title: Temporary Class Learning Module

CNO’s Temporary Class Learning Module provides an overview of nursing regulation in Ontario. It is designed to help applicants better understand the legal and ethical issues, and the professional accountabilities of the nursing profession.

The learning module is divided into five sections. Each will take approximately 10 minutes to complete.

This learning module references a series of documents and webpages that are relevant to your learning and practice. You can find links to them below each Chapter on this webpage.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Code of Conduct: Principle 2
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/learning-modules/code-of-conduct-principle-2/
Title: Code of Conduct: Principle 2

To support nurses with the application of Principle 2 in the Code of Conduct, CNO has created a series of learning modules focused on the three core behaviours of this principle: self-reflection, creating safer health care experiences and training and education. This series outlines the actions and behaviours nurses can take to provide inclusive and culturally safe care. These learning modules were created in collaboration with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of BC and the BC College of Nurses and Midwives (BCCNM).







------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Medication Decision Tool
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/decision-tool-medication/
Title: Medication Decision Tool

This tool is designed to help you apply theMedicationpractice standard. The practice standard is principle-based, which means that it uses broad statements. You will need to use critical inquiry and your knowledge, skill and judgment when making decisions about medication practices.

This tool is divided into three sections representing the principles in theMedicationpractice standard: authority, competence and safety.

Each principle has a set of questions for you to consider when faced with a decision about your medication practice. Answering these questions and reflecting on your practice will help you decide the best course of action. Not all questions may apply to your situation.

Click on each section to see the questions and related College resources. Click on the middle to open up theMedicationpractice standard.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Medication Decision Tool: Safety
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/decision-tool-medication/safety/
Title: Medication Decision Tool: Safety

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Medication Decision Tool: Competence
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/decision-tool-medication/competence/
Title: Medication Decision Tool: Competence

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Medication Decision Tool: Authority
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/decision-tool-medication/authority/
Title: Medication Decision Tool: Authority

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Infection Prevention and Control
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/infection-prevention-and-control/
Title: Infection Prevention and Control

Ensuring the use of safe, effective and ethical infection prevention and control measures is an important component of nursing care. To do so, nurses are expected to be aware of applicable CNOstandards, relevant legislation, best practices and organizational policies related to infection prevention and control.

The following addresses frequently asked questions nurses have about infection prevention and control and how to apply practice standards to specific clinical scenarios:

As outlined byInfection Prevention and Control Canada, proper hand hygiene is the single most-important infection prevention and control practice. In doing so, nurses provide and promote the best possible patient care.

CNO does not establish immunization requirements for nurses, individual employers do. Nurses are encouraged to work with their employers to determine immunization status within role requirements. One way nurses promote the best possible patient outcomes is knowing how their personal immunization status relates to their practice setting and taking appropriate measures to support patient well-being and safety. The goal of professional practice is to obtain the best possible patient outcome, with no unnecessary risks of harm.

Code of ConductTherapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship, Revised 2006Scope of Practice

Public Health Ontario's Online Learning ProgramsInfection Prevention and Control CoursesEnvironmental Cleaning ToolkitJust Clean Your HandsGuide to Infection Prevention and Control in Personal Service Settings, 3rd EditionInfection Prevention and Control CanadaPublic Services Health and Safety Association, Infection Prevention and Control Resources

Health Protection and Promotion ActOccupational Health and Safety Act

CNO has developed the following scenarios to provide nurses guidance around infection prevention and control measures.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nurse Practitioners
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/nurse-practitioners/
Title: Nurse Practitioners

Nurse Practitioners (NPs), also known as Registered Nurses in the extended class, are registered nurses who have met additional education, experience and exam requirements set by the College. They are authorized to diagnose, order and interpret diagnostic tests, and prescribe medication and other treatment.

NPs are accountable to theNurse Practitionerpractice standard in addition to the other practice standards and guidelines all nurses must follow.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Webcasts
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/
Title: Webcasts

From time to time, the College creates on-demand videos of interest to nurses, nursing educators and other stakeholders who wish to learn more about current regulatory issues and the role the College plays in nursing regulation.

New webcasts will be advertised onwww.cno.organd inThe Standard.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Code of Conduct Webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/code-of-conduct-for-nurses/code-of-conduct-webinar/
Title: Code of Conduct Webcast

This webcast will provide you with an overview of the College of Nurses of Ontario’s modernized Code of Conduct.

CNO has modernized the Code of Conduct practice standard. This webcast will help you better understand the revisions made to the Code and how to apply the Code into practice.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Employer Resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/
Title: Employer Resources

Employers of nurses play an important role in working with the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) to serve and protect the public’s right to safe and ethical nursing care.

This section provides supporting information and resources for employers about CNO’s investigation, prosecutions and monitoring processes. Employers will gain a better understanding of what happens when a report or complaint is received, the roles of CNO’s statutory committees, and how CNO monitors nurses with restricted, suspended or revoked certificates of registration.

This page is updated on a regular basis to keep employers informed of new information. Please check back often.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Employer Reference Group
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employer-reference-group/
Title: Employer Reference Group

The Employer Reference Group is made up of nurse employers from across Ontario who share information and collaborate on nursing regulatory issues of mutual interest.

The group enhances professional collaboration between nurse employers and the CNO and provides opportunities for education, discussion and consultation related to regulatory issues and accountability.

The main objectives of the Employer Reference Group is to:

Discuss and collaborate on regulatory related topics of interestClarify respective roles related to public protectionIdentify areas to support employers needs relating to nursing regulation such as policies, standards, guidelines, reporting and professional conduct processesPropose recommendations for consideration related to regulatory work

The Employer Reference group consists of CNO representatives and nursing employers that reflect the diversity of the nursing profession, practice settings and unique populations of the health care system in Ontario.

Read the terms of reference

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Employer's Toolkit: Sexual Abuse Prevention
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/
Title: Employer's Toolkit: Sexual Abuse Prevention

Public protection is our priority at the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO). Patients have a right to safe, competent and ethical nursing care - and that includes the right to be safe from anysexual abuseor inappropriate behaviour.

IntroductionWhat is sexual abuse?Definition of a "Patient"The power of imbalanceNot me: Not my colleagueOne year ruleVulnerable patientsMyths about patient sexual abuseInformed ConsentDeveloping a safe organizational cultureSupporting nurses in self-carePatient initiating a relationshipEmployer policies to prevent sexual abuse

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Introduction
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/introduction/
Title: Introduction

In Ontario, there is a zero-tolerance standard for patient sexual abuse by health care providers. When theProtecting Patients Act, 2017was passed into law, it introduced several changes to theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991(RHPA).The changes, which include a broader definition of “patient” and how health care regulators handle sexual abuse complaints, strengthens the protection of, and response to patient sexual abuse by health care professionals.

To understand factors surrounding patient sexual abuse by nurses, CNO conducted aresearch studyon professional conduct cases related to sexual abuse. The goal of this study was to identify risks of harm that could lead to sexual abuse and develop strategies to reduce these risks for patients.  Through this study, we learned that education is key prevention. Workplace awareness can help employees recognize the signs that lead to sexual abuse and understand what they can do to help.

As partners in safety, employers have an obligation to educate themselves and their employees to address the potential impact of the harm patient sexual abuse has and safeguard patients’ mental, emotional and physical well-being.

This toolkit provides guidance and resources for facilitators who work with nurses to protect and manage sexual abuse in the health care environment. By recognizing behaviours that may lead to sexual abuse, nurses and employers can act to prevent it.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: What is sexual abuse?
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/what-is-sexual-abuse/
Title: What is sexual abuse?

Patient sexual abuse is defined differently for healthcare providers under the RHPA than in criminal law. Under the RHPA, health professionals are accountable to a law that puts the needs of patients first.

By law, sexual abuse of a patient occurs when a nurse:

has physical sexual relations with a patienttouches a patient in a sexual manner (for example, touching a patient’s genitals when it is not required in caring for the patient)behaves in a sexual manner toward a patient (for example, touching a patient’s shoulder or hand unnecessarily and in a manner that implies a sexual interest in the patient)makes remarks of a sexual nature to a patient (for example, commenting on the size of a patient’s breasts or genitals)

Patient sexual abuse is different from the criminal act of sexual assault, which refers to a sexual act without consent. In the context of a nurse-patient relationship, it does not matter if the patient consents; it is always sexual abuse.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Definition of a "Patient"
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/definition-of-a-patient/
Title: Definition of a "Patient"

An individual is considered to be a nurse’s “patient” for a period of one year following the end of the professional nurse-patient relationship. This means, if a nurse begins a sexual relationship with an individual to whom they provided care to a year ago, the nurse’s conduct would be sexual abuse.

In the context of sexual abuse, a professional nurse-patient relationship exists if the nurse:

has direct interaction with an individual for the purposes of providing care;receives payment from an individual for a health care service;contributes to the health record for the individual;recommends a health care service the individual consents to; orprescribes the individual a drug for which a prescription is needed.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: The power of imbalance
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/the-power-of-imbalance/
Title: The power of imbalance

In the nurse-patient relationship, nurses hold a position of power by virtue of having:

professional knowledge and skills that patients rely on for their well-beingmore authority and influence in the health care systemaccess to patients' bodies (for example when performing physical exams)access to patient’s personal health information

Because of this power imbalance,anysexual relationship a nurse has with a patient is considered abuse and professional misconduct even when the patient perceived they consented. In this context, the patient is not in the position to consent due to the power imbalance.

Nurses are accountable for maintaining appropriate boundaries and meet the health care needs of their patients. It is exploitative for a nurse to use this relationship to meet their own social, emotional, or relationship needs. Crossing boundaries puts the nurse-patient relationship at risk, breaches patient trust and can cause severe harm. It also is a serious offence to engage in a sexual act with a patient.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Not me: Not my colleague
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/not-me-not-my-colleague/
Title: Not me: Not my colleague

While it may be hard to believe a nurse in your facility could sexually abuse patients, studies show that it can be anyone. Preventing patient sexual abuse includes education and awareness about how the law defines sexual abuse for health care professionals and the behaviours that can lead to sexual abuse.

Many nurses may not be aware that a sexual relationship with a patient is sexual abuse under Ontario law.Even though some actions may seem innocent to a nurse (for example, spending extra time with a patient after shift), multiple gestures similar in nature could be considered a boundary crossing which may lead to sexual abuse. There is also a misunderstanding of the timeframe that someone is considered a “patient” after the therapeutic nurse-patient relationship.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: One year rule
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/one-year-rule/
Title: One year rule

The law states a person is still considered a “patient” for one year after the therapeutic nurse-patient relationship is over. This means a nurse should not be involved in any form of sexual relations with that individual during the one year timeframe post-care.

There may be some instances where it may never acceptable to engage in sexual relations with a former patient. For example, the patient’s likelihood of requiring ongoing care.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Vulnerable patients
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/vulnerable-patients/
Title: Vulnerable patients

Research shows the risk of a sexual relationship developing between a nurse and patient may be highest in settings where the nurse provides care and interacts with patients over an extended period of time. Although some patients, particularlyvulnerable patients, may be at greater risk of sexual abuse, all patients are vulnerable and can become victims.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Myths about patient sexual abuse
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/myths-about-patient-sexual-abuse/
Title: Myths about patient sexual abuse

False. Even when a nurse covers a colleague during break and provides patient care for this short time period, this is considered atherapeutic nurse-patient relationship. This relationship is not defined by a length of time or by the nurse’s assignment or role in the plan of care. Nurses may only engage in a personal friendship, romantic relationship or sexual relationshipafter one yearfollowing the end of the therapeutic nurse-patient relationship, while considering a number of factors. For example, patient’s likelihood of requiring ongoing care.

False. Patients benefit from a therapeutic and professional relationship with their nurse, not a social relationship. When boundaries are violated and a professional relationship becomes a social relationship, patients may be harmed. Social relationships are not focused on patient’s needs, but rather the nurse’s needs. There is an unequal power balance, andbecoming a patient’s friend, has the potential to misuse and exploit this power.

False.In analyzing CNO’s sexual abuse cases, 49% of the cases involved male nurses.Our researchshows that female nurses are involved in sexual abuse cases.

False.Sexual abuse may not be easy to detect. Some behaviours are obvious such as touching of a sexual nature. However, other behaviours, such as a sexual remark, is less obvious. It is important that people are aware of what sexual abuse in a health care context is and the warning signs leading up tosexual abuse.

False:Research shows that sexual abuse is underreported. In Ontario, there is an estimated 200,000 that have experienced sexual abuse at the hands of health professionals over a six-year period. (Minister's Task Force on the Prevention of Sexual Abuse of Patients, 2016).

False:Sexual abuse is still and continues to be a problem. Our research has shown an increase of reported sexual abuse cases since 2015 but research shows that sexual abuse remains largely unreported.

False:As a partner in safety, employers have an obligation to alert CNO about concerns of a member’s practice. Fines may be imposed if a person or a facility fails to make a mandatory report relating to sexual abuse. Individuals may be fined up to $50,000 while corporations may be fined up to $200,000.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Informed Consent
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/informed-consent/
Title: Informed Consent

Depending on the nurse’s area of practice, clinical touching of patients may become routine for the nurse. However, it is never routine for the patient. Nurses must ensure that before patient care is provided, that they explain what they are doing and why, and receive informedconsentfrom the patient. Nurses must remain aware of the power they hold in health care settings and keep the patient perspective in view.

Giving clear, timely explanations of why a procedure is neededEnsuring touching will not be misinterpreted by the patient by explaining exactly what they will do and why it is necessaryAnswering questions the patient may haveRespecting the patient's right to privacy:provide appropriate drapingleave the room when the patient changes clothesBeing knowledgeable about gender, cultural, and ethnic sensitivitiesBeing alert to possible misunderstandingsAsking themselves what a neutral outsider would say if observing your conduct

CMPA - Respecting Boundaries - Preventing Boundary Issues



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Developing a safe organizational culture
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/developing-a-safe-organizational-culture/
Title: Developing a safe organizational culture

Creating a safe organizational culture in health care settings is important for both patients and employees. All levels of management and staff have a role in developing a nurturing environment where patients and employees can speak up about unsafe practice.

Here are some guiding questions you can use to reflect on your organizational culture:

What do your organizational policies say about workplace health and safety?Do these policies address patient safety?

Are safe and healthy behaviours, language and attitudes a priority?  For example: when a staff member doesn’t like a colleague, the expectation is that the staff member needs to be professional with that colleagueWhat strategies do you use to communicate these expectations to your staff?

Do all levels of staff/management, consistently demonstrate and model safe and healthy behaviours?

Are employees encouraged to identify and report patient safety issues? For example, with colleagues, through an incident reporting system or to management?

Is there a safe and accessible method for employees to raise concerns?

Do widely accepted practices in the organization support health and safety?

Communication:Create a blame free environment where employees speak up about patient safety issues with a focus on preventing future issues

Role-Modeling:Promote trust by demonstrating a continuous quality improvement of attitudes and actions regarding unsafe practice

Support:Support employees who speak up

Sharing Information:When relevant, share information to prevent a future situation

Safe culture fact sheet





------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Supporting nurses in self-care
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/supporting-nurses-in-self-care/
Title: Supporting nurses in self-care

A nurse’s health can affect the care they provide to patients. TheCode of Conductoutlines that nurses have an obligation to maintain their health and seek help if their health affects their ability to practice safely. Research shows that physical and emotional fatigue can reduce cognitive functioning including decision-making, memory and attention[i]. Personal and professional lives will have ups and downs. Employers play a key role in supporting nurses in self-care.

Here are some guiding questions to help employers reflect on how your organization currently supports nurses in self-care:

Does your organization foster a culture of self-care for employees?What services or programs does your organization offer to employees to support self-care?

Here are some suggested strategies to consider implementing within your organization:

Promoting or hosting mindfulness interventions. Employers can access a variety of information, including free online apps to guide mindfulness, breathing exercises and meditation.Encouraging communication between colleagues and staff members so they can better support and rely on one another.Offering stress management workshops or self-care education sessions during lunchSupporting employees access to counselling or therapy options.Promoting theNurse’s Health Program, a voluntary program that focuses on early identification and referral for treatment of mental health and substance use disorders.

Nurses taking care of themselves not only benefits patients, it benefits nurses with increased job and life satisfaction, relaxation and better physical health[ii].

Self care fact sheet



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Patient initiating a relationship
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/patients-initiating-a-relationship/
Title: Patient initiating a relationship

Finding a patient attractive is not a boundary violation. However, acting on feelings of attraction is not acceptable. Nurses are accountable for maintaining professional boundaries even after a patient has been discharged from a nurses’ care.

Being self-reflective is one way to help nurses maintain appropriate boundaries. Once a nurse is aware of their feelings they must ensure they manage them professionally.

Employers play a role in supporting nurses and ensuring staff understand their accountabilities related to professional boundaries and by also raising patient awareness of acceptable behaviour.

Look for early signs of emotional involvement (yours and your patient's).

Miranda is a nurse working the night shift in the emergency department of a busy urban hospital. One evening she provides care for a patient who came in with a fracture. As the patient is leaving, he asks Miranda for her phone number and suggests they get together for dinner sometime soon. Miranda finds this patient attractive and has enjoyed talking to him throughout her shift. She wonders if it would be okay to accept to share her phone number and go on a date as the patient has initiated the ongoing relationship.

Flag: definition of patient = one year after the termination of theTherapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship

Flag: patients cannot consent to a sexual relationship with a nurse while a patient or within the one-year time frame following the end of theTherapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship.  It doesn’t matter who initiated the relationship.

Related links: Case scenarios of patient sexual abuse by nurses.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Employer policies to prevent sexual abuse
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/employer-resources/employers-toolkit-sexual-abuse-prevention/employer-policies-to-prevent-sexual-abuse-of-patients/
Title: Employer policies to prevent sexual abuse

This section of the toolkit is intended to inform organizations of policy development to help prevent, detect and address sexual abuse of patients by nurses. This section is not intended to provide legal advice and cannot be relied on for that purpose. Organizations may consider seeking advice from a lawyer to ensure their policies and/or procedures are appropriate for their circumstances and comply with all applicable laws and professional standards.

Employer policies set the parameters of professional behaviour in the workplace. Clear policies and procedures let employees know:

how they, and others, are expected to act in the workplacetheir rights and responsibilitieshow to recognize inappropriate conductwhat to do if someone in the workplace behaves unprofessionally.

Every organization’s policies must reflect the uniqueness of their practice environment and address the patients needs. Applying evidence, and consulting with stakeholders and experts can assist with the development of appropriate policies and procedures preventing and addressing sexual abuse.

Employers should have a policy on patient sexual abuse. At a minimum, this policy should include:

a statement of the organization's zero tolerance for sexual abuse of patientsan organizational commitment to the eradication of sexual abuse of patientsencouraging staff to bring issues forward when they have a concerna clear explanation of appropriate professional boundariesa clear definition of what constitutes sexual abuse (under the Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991)impact on victimsconcrete examples of sexual abusewarnings signs (for example, behaviours that can precede sexual abuse)contextual information about the problem of sexual abuse of patients by health professionalsprevalence of sexual abusesteps to ensure patient safety if information regarding sexual abuse comes to an employee's attentiona specific explanation of employees' reporting duties with respect to sexual abuse, including:what to reportwhen to reportwho to report to (for example, management, regulatory college, child protection services)how to reportthe consequences and/or penalties for employees who sexually abuse patientsa strategy for prevention of sexual abuse, including ongoing training and education for employeesthe importance of self-care

When developing policies to help prevent, detect, and address sexual abuse, you may find it helpful to cross-reference or link to other relevant policies, including those that support (a culture of) patient safety. For example policies abouthiring,supervision/monitoringof staff,workplace violence and harassment, orsocial mediause, all may incorporate   the standards and expectations for behaviour in the workplace.

If possible, employers should monitor the impact of their policies and procedures, which could include data collection, and/or feedback from employees.

Organizational policies and procedures should be reviewed and modified on a regular basis to reflect the current state of the law, best practices, changes in the organization, employee feedback, and any information collected through monitoring.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Code of Conduct for Nurses
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/code-of-conduct-for-nurses/
Title: Code of Conduct for Nurses

The College of Nurses of Ontario’s Code of Conduct sets the standard of practice all nurses are accountable to.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Code of Conduct FAQs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/code-of-conduct-for-nurses/code-of-conduct-faqs/
Title: Code of Conduct FAQs

The revised Code now reflects

Revised principles to support the reorganization of enhanced statementsA new principle focused on providing inclusive and culturally safe care by practicing cultural humilityIntegration of key concepts throughout the Code (for example, empathy and advocacy)Action-oriented and measurable statementsEnhanced alignment with professional misconduct regulation (for example, clarity around acts of professional misconduct such as cooperating with CNO, misappropriation)Embedded links to other practice standards.

CNO has developed a series of resources to support the revised Code’s application. They include

An introductory video that describes the key changes to the CodeA learning module focusing on Principle 2 of the CodeAwebinarto help understand the key features of the Code and a review of broad-based questions that helps describe how to apply the Code into practiceAsk practice resources to address nurses and other stakeholder inquiries

Please continue to monitor this webpage for future resources.

CNO’sCodeis a provincial document and that reflects the legal framework and healthcare climate in Ontario.

TheCodeis CNO’s overarching  practice standard  all nurses in Ontario are accountable to. It summarizes the expectations from other practice standards. Other CNO practice standards , such asTherapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship, Revised 2006andDocumentation, Revised 2008, support theCodeand provide guidance to nurses’ practice.

Practice guidelines, such asConflict Prevention and ManagementandIndependent Practice, provide guidance on specific practice-related issues related to these topic areas. Nurses are expected to guide their practice using theCodewith otherstandards, guidelinesandeducational tools.

You are accountable to both CNO and your employer. You are responsible for ensuring your practice and conduct aligns with standards of practice set out by CNO and accountabilities and expectations set by your employer(s).

If you have questions about your specific role and your employer’s Code of Conduct, consult with your employer to clarify. If you have questions about CNO’sCode of Conduct, send us yourquestion.

“CNO considers the Code in regulatory processes and in reviewing the practice of nurses such as in Quality Assurance and Professional Conduct processes. Nursing practice is considered in its working context and circumstances.”

TheCodeis a practice standard. TheRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991requires nurses to adhere to standards in carrying out their professional responsibilities. CNO places these expectations to ensure nurses provide responsible, safe and quality patient care. Breaching, contravening or failing to meet these standards is considered professional misconduct. CNO will assess the information considering the context nurses are working as outlined in theStandard of Careand will determine what action should be taken, if any. To learn more about the types of conduct that are defined as professional misconduct, read theProfessional Conduct: Professional Misconductreference document.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Inclusive and Culturally Safe Care Resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/code-of-conduct-for-nurses/culturally-safe-care-resources/
Title: Inclusive and Culturally Safe Care Resources

CNO’sCode of Conductincludes Principle 2, which focuses on providing inclusive and culturally safe care. This principle highlights the importance of learning and understanding cultural context and how an increased awareness of, for example, disabilities, sexual identity and anti-Indigenous and anti-Black racism, can influence client care. To support nurses’ learning on inclusive and culturally safe care, CNO recommends the following resources for guidance. We have included practice resources as well as reports that can help strengthen nurses’ learning.

Provincial Resources

British Columbia College of Nurses and MidwivesIndigenous Cultural Safety, Cultural Humility and Anti-RacismIndigenous Cultural Safety, Cultural Humility and Anti-Racism: Practice Standard Companion GuideCollege of Physicians & Surgeons of Ontario –Examining the root causes of ableismNorthern Health Indigenous Health –Cultural SafetyThe Ontario Human Rights CodeOntario Human Rights Commission –Call it out: racism, racial discrimination and human rightsWeRPN:My Commitment to Cultural SafetyThe 519 –Glossary of terms

National Resources(From CNO’s culturally sensitive care page)

Canadian Centre for Diversity and InclusionCanadian Medical Association Journal –Ableism in the medical professionCBC News –The deadly danger of ableism in health care during a pandemicHealth Canada’sIndigenous HealthNational Collaborating Center for Determinants of HealthNational Collaborating Centre for Indigenous Health

Reports

RNAO -Black Nurses Task Force ReportTruth and Reconciliation Commission of CanadaReclaiming Power and Place: The Final Report of the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Confidentiality and Privacy
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/confidentiality-and-privacy/
Title: Confidentiality and Privacy

Privacy breaches are serious offences that negatively affect the trust between nurses and their clients, as well as the public’s trust in the nursing profession.

This two-chapter webcast was created to educate nurses and other stakeholders about the serious legal responsibility of protecting personal health information.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Confidentiality and Privacy: Case Studies
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/confidentiality-and-privacy/confidentiality-and-privacy-case-studies/
Title: Confidentiality and Privacy: Case Studies

To help you reflect on your practice and apply the concepts discussed inConfidentiality And Privacy: An Overviewto situations that could result in privacy breaches.



Download the slides

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Confidentiality and Privacy: An Overview
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/confidentiality-and-privacy/confidentiality-and-privacy-an-overview/
Title: Confidentiality and Privacy: An Overview

A look at your accountabilities for maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of personal health information, changes to thePersonal Health Information Protection Actand consequences of privacy breaches.



Download the slides

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Critical Inquiry and Evidence-Informed Practice Webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/critical-inquiry-and-evidence-informed-practice-webcast/
Title: Critical Inquiry and Evidence-Informed Practice Webcast

This webcast was recorded during a College teleconference that featured an interview with Karen Riddell, Director, Professional Practice and Operations at Windsor Regional Hospital, and Nancy Lefebre, Chief Clinical Executive Senior VP Knowledge and Practice at Saint Elizabeth. In the 48-minute interview, Nancy and Karen share their expertise on the concepts of critical inquiry and evidence-informed practice and how they apply to nursing.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Documentation Webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/documentation-webcast/
Title: Documentation

Evaluate this webcast

Download the slides

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Medical Assistance in Dying Webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/maid-webcast/
Title: Medical Assistance in Dying Webcast

Our Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID) webcast inform nurses about the changes related to the March 17, 2021 implementation of Bill C-7 under the Criminal Code. It is an overview of how these changes affect NPs who provide MAID and the role of RNs and RPNs who support patients in the MAID process. It also includes information based on the practice experiences of an NP who provides MAID.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Medication Practice Standard: An Overview webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/medication-practice-standard-an-overview-webcast/
Title: Medication Practice Standard: An Overview webcast

This webcast is based on theMedicationpractice standard.Medicationis a short, principle-based document that uses common nursing principles to guide your medication practice.

Evaluate this webcast

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nurse Practitioner practice standard
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/nurse-practitioner-practice-standard/
Title: Nurse Practitioner practice standard

This webcast is an overview of the Nurse Practitioner practice standard. It is intended to help Registered Nurses in the Extended Class apply the accountabilities in the NP practice standard, and to help others understand NP practice.

This webcast is divided into six sections. Each will take approximately five minutes to complete.

How nurses in the Extended Class differ from nurses in the General Class.

The documents, laws, and standards that NPs must apply to their practice.

The different types of health assessments, the diagnostic process, and NPs’ accountabilities when ordering tests.

The pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical therapies and procedures that NPs order.

The requirements and restrictions for dispensing medications.

The requirements and restrictions for prescribing and dispensing controlled substances.

Download the slides

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practice Reflection Webcasts
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/practice-reflection-videos/
Title: Practice Reflection Webcasts

Anne Coghlan, Executive Director and CEO of the College, explains how practice reflection is part of being a competent nursing professional.

View now

A look at the different ways nurses can reflect on their practice: formally, informally, and by getting feedback from colleagues.

View now

Includes information to help nurses who have been selected for a Guided Reflection meeting, part of the College's Professional Conduct process. Nurses learn how to prepare for the meeting with College staff, and what will happen when they come to the College for the meeting.

View now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practice Reflection Videos - Intro
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/practice-reflection-videos/practice-reflection-videos-intro/
Title: Introduction to Practice Reflection

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: The Value of Practice Reflection
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/practice-reflection-videos/the-value-of-practice-reflection/
Title: The Value of Practice Reflection

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Guided Reflection: What to expect
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/practice-reflection-videos/guided-reflection-what-to-expect/
Title: Guided Reflection: What to expect

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scope of Practice Webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/scope-of-practice-webcast/
Title: Scope of Practice Webcast

This webcast will provide you with an overview of the Scope of Practice practice standard.

CNO’s Scope of Practice practice standard outlines nurses’ legislative accountabilities and other key requirements nurses need to consider when deciding whether to perform an activity. This webcast will help you better understand the standard and how to apply it in your practice.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Social Media: Reflect Before You Post Webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/social-media-reflect-before-you-post/
Title: Social Media: Reflect Before You Post

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Therapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship: Maintaining Boundaries Webcast
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/webcasts/therapeutic-nurse-client-relationship/
Title: Therapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship: Maintaining Boundaries

Evaluate this webcast

Download the slides

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Understanding Restraints
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/restraints/
Title: Understanding Restraints

Nurses are accountable for providing, facilitating, advocating and promoting the best possible patient care and to take action when patient safety and well-being are compromised, including when deciding to apply restraints. These are key accountabilities outlined in theCode of Conduct.

There are three types of restraints: physical, chemical and environmental. Physical restraints limit a patient’s movement. Chemical restraints are any form of psychoactive medication used not to treat illness, but to intentionally inhibit a particular behaviour or movement. Environmental restraints control a patient’s mobility.

Health care teams use restraints for a variety of reasons, such as protecting patients from harming themselves or others, after all other interventions have failed. Restraints should be used only for the shortest time when prevention, de-escalation and crisis management strategies have failed to keep the individual and others safe. In emergency situations, nurses may apply restraints without consent when a serious threat of harm to the patient or others exists and only after all alternative interventions were unsuccessful. Restraint use should be continually assessed by the health care team and reduced or discontinued as soon as possible. After the discontinuing restraints, interprofessional teams should debrief with the patient, patient’s family, or substitute decision maker to discuss intervention, previous interventions and alternatives to restraints.

With any intervention, such as restraint use, nurses need to ensure they actively involve the patient, patient’s family, substitute decision makers and the broader health care team. Nurses are also accountable for documenting nursing care provided, including assessment, planning, intervention and evaluation.

Read more about  restraint use, alternative approaches to restraints, documentation and consent, in thePatient Restraints Minimization Act,RNAO Best Practice Guideline: Promoting Safety: Alternative Approaches to the Use of Restraintsand in CNO’sDocumentationstandard andConsentguideline.

It is important to note restraint use also puts patients at increased risk of medical, psychological, and functional complications. To minimize patient risks, nurses are expected to be aware of applicable CNOstandards, relevant legislation, best evidence and organizational policies related to restraint use.

CNO also developed the following scenarios to provide nurses guidance around restraint use.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nursing Assessments
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/nursing-assessments/
Title: Nursing Assessments

Assessing patients is part of a nurse’s professional practice to keep patient’s safe and improve a patient’s health outcomes.

TheNursing Act, 1991includes the accountability of assessing patients in the nursing scope of practice statement.

A nursing assessment is a process where a nurse gathers, sorts and analyzes a patient’s health information using evidence informed tools to learn more about a patient’s overall health, symptoms and concerns. This includes considering the patient’s biological, social, psychological, cultural and spiritual values and beliefs.[1].

Assessments are critical to client safety. Timely and comprehensive assessments is a fundamental skill l nurses should demonstrate in any area of nursing practice. Nurses are accountable to document and follow up as needed on any information that may inform the client’s plan of care and ongoing decision-making about the client’s health status, which may include identifying urgent, emergent and/or life-threatening conditions.

During a nursing assessment the nurse collect both subjective and objective information using evidence informed tools to assess the patient as a whole. A nursing assessment may include, but is not limited to the following:

environmental assessmentcultural assessmentphysical assessmentpsychological assessmentsafety assessmentpsychosocial assessment

Nurses are expected to use their clinical judgment to determine whether they are competent to complete an  assessment and provide safe client care. This may include consistently reassessing clients as needed.  Nurses are accountable to collaborate and communicate their findings with the broader health care team and if required, escalate their concerns to an appropriate health care provider.

Nurses are accountable to reassess patients frequently to make sure the care plan still meets the patients needs and address any changes to the patients’ health condition.  Consistently reassessing patients is a key component to maintaining patient safety and improving patient health outcomes. Not doing so, may pose significant risks to their health.

Though performing assessments are part of a nurses’ foundational competencies, it is critical that nurses maintain this knowledge and skill. Nurses can maintain or increase competence in assessments through specialized education or developing new skills throughout the course of their nursing practice. All nurses are accountable toreflect on their practiceevery day to determine their learning needs and actively update their knowledge and skills to maintain their competence. Nurses are expected to participate inQuality Assuranceand continue their ongoing learning and development.

Nurses do not require an order to perform assessments. Nurses have the authority to perform an  assessment (including vital signs) using their nursing knowledge, skill and judgment. Employer policies may provide additional direction related to nursing assessments, such as processes, tools and best practices.

A theory, framework or evidence-based tool should be used when describing the patients’ situation. Nurses should also consult the patient and other members of the health care team to create a patient-centered care plan.

Nurses are accountable toreflect on their practiceevery day to determine their learning needs and actively update their knowledge and skills to maintain their competence. Nurses are expected to participate inQuality Assuranceand continue their ongoing learning and development.

Nursingdocumentationprovides a clear picture of:

the clients’s needs or goals,the nurses actions based on the needs assessmentthe outcomes and evaluations of those actions

Assessment findings should be documented along with any changes to the client’s care plan.

To support a collaborative approach to care, nurses should ensure their documentation is a complete record of the nursing care and reflects all aspects of the nursing process, including assessment, planning, intervention (independent and collaborative) and evaluation.

Employers are encouraged to have clear policies that align with the standards of practice, that meet the needs of the practice setting including requirements for nursing assessments.

Scope of PracticeCode of ConductTherapeutic Nurse-Client RelationshipNurse PractitionerApplying Ultrasound in Nursing AssessmentsEntry-to-practice Competencies for Registered Practical NursesEntry-to-practice Competencies for Registered NursesEntry-to-practice Competencies for Nurse Practitioners

A-Z Guide of Clinical Assessment Tools for Nurses(U.K)

Potter, P. A., Duggleby, W. D., & Astle, B. J. (2018).Canadian fundamentals of nursing(6th ed.). Elsevier Canada.

Jarvis, C., Browne, A. J., MacDonald-Jenkins, J., & Luctkar-Flude, M. (2019).Physical examination & health assessment(3rd ed.). Elsevier Canada.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Controlled Substances
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/controlled-substances/
Title: Controlled Substances

Harm Reduction in nursing practice

CNO recognizes and acknowledges the devastating impact of the opioid crisis. The COVID-19 pandemic heightened the crisis, while at the same time street supply has become progressively more harmful, leading to an increase in opioid related overdoses and deaths.

Nurses provide critical support to individuals impacted by this crisis. They are practicing in emerging and alternative areas of care to reduce risk, improve health and connect individuals with key health and social services.

Harm reduction refers to policies, programs and practices to reduce adverse health, social and economic consequences of legal and illegal psychoactive drugs without necessarily reducing drug consumption. Harm reduction practices are fundamental competencies for all nurses upon entry-to-practice.

CNO recognizes that nurses incorporate principles ofharm reductionwith respect to substance use and misuse into plans of care in the context of a comprehensive treatment plan or as a standalone harm reduction strategy. These practices enable nurses to take action and support better outcomes by providing the necessary client-centered care.

CNO encourages nurses to seek and use the best available evidence to inform their practice.  There may be situations where nurses cannot provide optimal client care due to circumstances beyond their control. These situations often require a systems approach for resolution. It is important to remember that even in situations where nurses cannot provide optimal client care (such as working with limited resources or increased client load), they remain accountable to theCode of Conduct.

As with all nursing care, nurses must use their knowledge, skill and judgement in considering the client’s safety and unique needs. CNO is committed to protecting the public by supporting nurses in maintaining their accountability towards their continued competence within each of their individual practice settings.

Controlled Substances: Resources and ReferencesEntry-to Practice Competencies:Registered Practical NursesRegistered NursesNurse PractitionersEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Nurse Practitioners: Not in effect - will takeeffect September 2024

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Controlled Substances: Resources and References
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/educational-tools/controlled-substances/controlled-substances-resources/
Title: Controlled Substances: Resources and References

The purpose of this page is to support safe nursing practice through sharing evidence-informed resources to inform clinical decision-making and ensure patients receive safe, effective and ethical care.

When determining what sources of information are most appropriate to inform your nursing practice, use your clinical judgment to assess the individual care needs of each patient, the appropriateness of the nursing practice and the practice environment you are working in.

Connexontario DRUG AND ALCOHOL HELPLINETo find a withdrawal management centre in your community, call at 1 800 565-8603

Opioid Substitution Therapies Drug Information LineCall 1 888 519-6069. Phone line is open Monday to Friday, 0900 hours – 1700 hours.

Controlled Drugs and Substances Actand regulationsCanadian drugs and substances strategyCOVID-19 and substance usetoolkitMethadone ProgramOffice of Controlled Substances: Contact informationOpioids – Services and informationResponding to Canada’s Opioid Crisis

COVID-19 Pandemic – National Rapid GuidanceNational Injectable Opioid Agonist Treatment GuidelineNational Opioid Use Disorder Guideline

Opioid Prescribing for Acute PainOpioid Prescribing for Chronic PainOpioid Use Disorder (Opioid Addiction)

Narcotics Safety and Awareness Act, 2010Narcotics Monitoring System



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: RN Prescribing
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/rn-prescribing/
Title: RN Prescribing Practice

Registered Nurses (RNs) in Ontario have the option to expand their scope of practice under theNursing Act, 1991, to prescribe specific medications and communicate diagnoses for the purpose of prescribing those medications.

Prescribing is not part of entry-level RN competencies. RNs must successfully completeprescribing education approved by CNO'sCouncil to prescribe medication and communicate diagnoses for the purposes of prescribing safely, effectively and ethically.

Once an RN completes prescribing education, information will be added to their profile on CNO’s public Register,Find a Nurse.This information confirms the RN meets all the requirements and has the authority to prescribe the specified medications outlined under theNursing Act.

RNs with the authority to prescribe can prescribe approved medications for the following purposes:

ImmunizationContraceptionTravel healthTopical wound careSmoking cessationAnesthetics (topical only)Epinephrine for anaphylaxisOver-the-counter medication

For the list of medications authorized RNs can prescribe,click here.

RNs who wish to prescribe must complete Council approvedRN prescribing education.

The school will verify with CNO that the RN has completed the program and met the requirements for prescribing. CNO will then update  it’s public Register,Find a Nurse,to make it easy to identify that the RN is authorized to prescribe.

RNs with the authority to prescribe can only do so in practice settings or facilities where RN prescribing is authorized by law and permitted by the employer. ThePublicHospitals Actdoes not permit RNs to prescribe medications in hospital settings.

Employers are responsible for determining the roles and responsibilities of their employees, including determining whether nurses can perform certain activities and procedures in the practice setting. RNs are expected to consult with their employers to confirm that prescribing is permitted in the practice setting.

CNO’s newRegistered Nurse (RN) Prescribingpractice standardoutlines the legislated scope of practice and professional accountabilities for RNs with prescribing authority.

The new practice standard expands on the accountabilities found in theMedicationstandard,Scope of Practicestandard and theCode of Conduct. RNs are expected to practice in compliance with both legislation and CNO practice standards.

The new practice standard expands on the accountabilities found in theCode of Conductas well as other practice standards, such as theMedicationstandard andScope of Practicestandard . RNs are expected to practice in compliance with both legislation and CNO practice standards. RNs are also expected to engage in daily practice reflection and actively update their knowledge and skills throughquality assuranceto maintain their continued competence.

Resources will also be created or updated to support the safe implementation of RN prescribing in practice.

Ontario regulation 275/94RN Prescribing FAQsStandards and learning

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: RN Prescribing Drug List
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/rn-prescribing/rn-prescribing-drug-list/
Title: RN Prescribing Drug List

The following chart lists the medications authorized RNs can prescribe in Ontario:

Ontario Regulation 275/94

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: RN prescribing
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/rn-prescribing/faqs-rn-prescribing/
Title: FAQs: RN prescribing

The following are answers to questions you may have about RNs expanded scope of practice to prescribe certain medications and communicate diagnoses for purposes of prescribing.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practice Support
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/Practice-Support/
Title: Practice Support

Our Practice Consultants are available to help nurses access the tools they need to make the best decision about providing safe, competent, and ethical nursing care. It is not always possible for our Practice Consultants to provide a simple yes or no answer as nursing practice is complex and what a nurse has the authority to do can vary based on legislation and employer policies that apply to a specific practice setting. The nurse is expected to determine whether they have the knowledge, skill and judgment to proceed with any task or role.

CNO Practice Consultants will help you identify the appropriate resources to guide decision-making and help understand nursing accountabilities by:

Directing you to our resources, such as educational tools, FAQ’s, and guidance documents, on our webpage that apply to your questionHelping you to identify nursing accountabilitiesExplaining how theCode of ConductandStandards of Practiceapply to your situationReferring you to additional sources of information

CNO’s duty is to serve and protect the public interest through the regulation of our members. Practice Support is one way that CNO assists nurses, stakeholders, and members of the public.

You can submit your question(s) using thisform.

You will receive a response by email. If you need additional support, or there is a lack of clarity on the issue, we may call you and follow-up with an email summarizing the discussion.

We respond to the majority of questions within three business day. However, if the scope of your inquiry goes beyond Practice Support and we need to consult with other areas of the College, or externally, it could take longer to receive a response.

Anyone who has questions about nursing practice.

We have developed amodelto explain the role of Practice Support in promoting safe nursing practice.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practice Support FAQs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/Practice-Support/practice-support-faqs/
Title: Practice Support FAQs

No. We will receive your practice questions through theonline submission formand byemail. You will receive a response to your inquiry by e-mail. If additional support is required or there is lack of clarity on a practice issue, Practice Consultants may follow up with a phone call and an email summarizing the discussion. The email is kept as a record of the communication for accurate documentation and transparency of the exchange.

Interpreting a practice standard as it applies to a specific practice question involves considering several variables that can influence patient outcomes. The Practice Support team may not be aware of all these variables related to your specific scenario, since the only information we have about your question is what you share with us. Therefore, we could provide you with an incorrect interpretation that could place your client at risk.

CNO is committed to protecting your privacy and confidentiality.  We document all Practice Support inquiries and consultations and store them securely. Records of Practice Support consultations are not available to other departments at the CNO. But if your questions involve patient safety or risk of harm, for example from the incompetence or incapacity of a CNO member, the CNO might have to investigate. In this situation we will refer you to our Professional Conduct team, or alert them to the concern, and an investigator might contact you to continue the discussion. Practice Support can still provide you with guidance and resources in response to your questions about nursing practice.

In certain limited circumstances (for example, incidents that might involve child abuse or neglect), the law may require CNO to report information to other agencies.

If your question is best answered by another area of the College, we will forward your inquiry to the relevant team for response.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practice Support Model
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/Practice-Support/practice-support-model/
Title: Practice Support Model



We have developed a model to explain the role of Practice Support in promoting safe nursing practice. The College uses information generated from the three sources of input in the model to identify resources that need to be developed, and the best way to support stakeholders who will be using these resources. Together, the inputs and outputs in the model create a program that leads to protecting the public. This is one way the College provides practice support.

For example, the Practice Support team could receive input from stakeholders about an area of risk regarding a certain medication. The team would then develop new resources and/or update current resources to help nurses and nursing employers apply the College’s Medication practice standard regarding that medication.



Protecting the public is the College’s legislated mandate. We meet this mandate by ensuring safe nursing practice. One way we do this is by developing and maintaining standards of practice.

A stakeholder is a group that has shared interests with the College. We engage with a variety of stakeholders including, but not limited to:

members of the public who receive care from nursesnursing employersnurse educatorsstudentsgovernmentnurse associations and unions.

We use our engagement with these groups to identify key issues that relate to our legislative mandate to protect the public. For example, we can identify trends or hot topics in nursing or the health care field. We also identify ways we can support their needs, such as, developing an online “tool kit” that employers can access to help them support their nursing staff in applying the College’s practice standards.

The College analyzes internal data (for example, the data we have related to nursing conduct) as well as current trends, issues and literature to identify potential areas of risk to the public.

Nurses, as regulated health care professionals, are accountable for meeting their legislative requirements, as are other stakeholders, such as nursing employers. Our role is to help stakeholders understand the legislation and how it relates to safe nursing practice.

The College’s practice standards outline the expectations for nurses. They inform nurses of their accountabilities, and the public and other stakeholders of what to expect of nurses. We develop and maintain these standards and other educational resources to support safe nursing practice.

The College provides a variety of educational and consultative resources to help nurses and other stakeholders understand the standards and how to apply them to nursing practice.

After the College identifies stakeholder needs, we will develop new online resources that are relevant to all stakeholders, not just nurses, and that can be accessed at any time by anyone. For example, offering an online resource for patients and their families to help them understand what to expect from nursing care.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Partners in patient safety
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/Practice-Support/partners-in-patient-safety/
Title: Partners in patient safety

Patient safety is a collective responsibility that involves partnership and support from other stakeholders and the public.

CNO partners with multiple stakeholders who have different roles in the nursing profession.  Together we support safe nursing practice, and we each have a role in supporting quality nursing practice.

CNO often gets questions that need to be directed to one of our partners, because it is not within our mandate or scope to do so. It is important, as a nurse, to understand the roles of our system partners so that you know who to go to for questions and concerns.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Scope of Practice – Proposed changes
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/scope-of-practice--proposed-changes/
Title: Scope of Practice – Proposed changes

The Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care has asked us towork on regulationsto expand the scope of practice for NPs, RNs and RPNs. These changes will increase patients’ choice of and access to health care services.

To be notified about ongoing work on changes to nursing scope of practice, watch theNews section of cno.orgThe Standard,and our social media channels, includingFacebook,Twitter,LinkedInandInstagramfor more info.

The Ministry of Health is exploring changes to expand NP scope of practice. These changes are intended to increase patient access to timely health care services and reduce barriers to patient care.

Stay tuned for more information.

RNs who meet requirements can prescribe certain medications and communicate diagnoses for the purpose of prescribing.

ReadRN prescribing practicefor detailed information, including which medications authorized RNs can prescribe.

The Ministry of Health has approved  changes under theNursing Act, 1991that allow RPNs the authority to independently initiate the following controlled acts:

Irrigating, probing, debriding and packing of a wound below the dermis or below a mucous membranevenipuncture in order to establish peripheral intravenous access and maintain patency, in certain circumstancesputting an instrument, hand or finger beyond the individual’s labia majora for the purpose of assessing or assisting with health management activitiesputting an instrument or finger beyond an artificial opening into the client’s body for the purpose of assessing or assisting with health management activities

RPNs with relevant competence can currently perform these activitiesif they have an order.

Initiationis the process of independently deciding that the procedure is required, then performing that procedure without an order. While nurses may have access to perform controlled acts, they may not be able to do so in certain practice settings because of legislation or facility policies. For example, RPNs who practice in hospitals will always need an order. This is a requirement under thePublic Hospitals Act. To learn more about initiation, read theScope of Practicestandard.

FAQs: Expanding RPN scope of practice

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: Changing nursing regulation
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/scope-of-practice--proposed-changes/faqs-changing-nursing-regulation/
Title: FAQs: Changing nursing regulation

The Ontario Ministry of Health determines when nursing regulation needs to be changed in the province.

CNO's role is to protect the public, so when the Ministry of Health identifies that a regulation change is needed to theNursing Act, 1991,CNO works to identify if changes to our regulatory mechanisms are needed to ensure nurses can still practice safely and competently if the proposed changes become law.

This review of our regulatory mechanisms includes examining our entry-to-practice requirements, practice standards, professional conduct and Quality Assurance program. We also conduct a review of the models or methods used by other jurisdictions, and of the current research and literature related to the proposed changes. We work closely with government, nurses, educators, academics and others to understand their needs and perspectives about the proposed changes.

CNO presents Council with the outcomes of the research and reviews, and the feedback from government, nurses, educators, academics and other stakeholders. Council reviews these outcomes and feedback, then directs CNO to begin drafting a proposal. This proposal (a draft of the new regulation) is then circulated broadly to the public and all nurses for feedback.

After the consultation period, Council reviews the data and feedback received. Council then determines if the proposed regulation as drafted protects the public or if the draft requires amendments. If Council has concerns about the public's safety, the proposed regulation is reviewed, amended, and those amendments re-circulated for feedback.

Once Council determines the proposed regulation as drafted is in the public's interest, Council and CNO send the drafted regulation to the Ministry for their review and approval.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: Expanding RPN scope of practice
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/scope-of-practice--proposed-changes/faqs-expanding-rpn-sop/
Title: FAQs: Expanding RPN scope of practice

In theirletter, the Ministry of Health shares that expanding the RPN scope will provide patients more timely access to healthcare services, therefore reducing barriers to patient care.

The main difference between RNs and RPNs is foundational education. While RNs and RPNs study from the same body of nursing knowledge, RNs study for a longer period of time, allowing for a greater depth and breadth of foundational knowledge.

TheNursing Act, 1991identifies which controlled act procedures a nurse can initiate in certain situations. This means that a nurse can independently decide if a specific procedure is required and safely perform it without an order from an NP or physician. CNO’sScope of Practicestandard includes a list of the controlled act procedures RNs ad RPNs can initiate.

While nurses may have access to perform or initiate controlled acts, they may not be able to do so in certain practice settings because of legislation or facility policies. For example, RNs and RPNs who practice in hospitals will always need an order. This is a requirement under thePublic Hospitals Act, 1990.

Additionally, nurses must always have the competence, support and an environment/location that allows them to initiate controlled acts. If any of these are missing, a nurse must not initiate the controlled act, even if they have the legal authority to do so.

Nursing practice is always evolving and CNO must respond to these changes. The current revisions to the RPN scope reflect the reality of nursing practice today and remove unnecessary barriers to patient care.

Years of foundational education continues to be the distinguishing difference between RNs and RPNs. Nursing practice is broad profession constantly expanding its scope of practice. In the near future, RNs will be permitted to prescribe medication and communicate diagnoses for the purpose of prescribing medication for certain non-complex conditions.

CNO’s only mandate is to ensure nursing is safe for the public.You can learn more about CNO’s role here.CNO does not have the authority to determine a nurse’s salary.

The competencies needed to initiate controlled acts are built on the foundational education of all nurses but are generally developed through continuing learning activities and experience in practice. All nurses must continually reflect on their practice and identify if they have the competence to initiate a controlled act. If a nurse identifies that initiating a controlled act is beyond their competency but this aspect of care would benefit their patient population, they shouldoutline a planto attain the needed competence.

In short, this scope expansion gives RPNs who already have the competence to perform the controlled act the legal authority to independently decide that the act is required and safely perform it without an order. If the RPN does not have the competence to perform the act, they should not do so.

Research and feedback from our consultation determined that existing regulatory mechanisms are sufficient to ensure public protection. As these changes are implemented, CNO will raise awareness of these mechanisms before these changes come into effect.

CNO will keep you informed about all changes to nursing scope of practice viacno.organd our monthly online magazine,The Standard. You can also stay up-to-date by following us on social media: includingFacebook,Twitter,LinkedInandInstagram.

It is important to be aware of the limits of your individual competence andpractice. Determining if you have the necessary authority to initiate a controlled act is only step one. You must always evaluate your knowledge and skills and use your judgement to determine if it is appropriate for you to provide patient care. If a patient requires care beyond your knowledge and skill, you must consult and collaborate with the health care team to best meet the patient’s needs, or request that care be transferred to another nurse.

CNO is not requiring RPNs to engage in specific education before engaging in this expanded area of practice, because we recognize that while nurses enter practice with the foundational competencies, the knowledge to safely initiate a controlled act is built over time through experience in practice, as well as continuing competence activities.

If an RPN identifies that initiating any of these procedures is a need for their patient, they must consider if they have the competence to do so before proceeding and outline a plan to attain competence, if needed.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: CNO Documents
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/list-of-all-publications/
Title: College Documents

The following is a list of practice standards, practice guidelines, forms and other publications available from the College of Nurses of Ontario.

All documents listed below are available free of charge. An updated version of Adobe Reader may be required to view some documents.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Magazines & Newsletters
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/
Title: Magazines & Newsletters

As part of its mandate, the College of Nurses distributes information about nursing standards and legislation through publications that aim to inform three of its core audiences: College members, employers and the general public.

For current and back issues, click on the publication link.

The StandardThe Standard is the College's digital magazine offering quick and easy-to-read information about nursing regulation in Ontario, including updates to practice standards, changes to regulation and legislation, and other news affecting nursing practice.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: The Standard
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/
Title: The Standard

The Standardis the College's digital magazine offering quick and easy-to-read information about nursing regulation in Ontario, including updates to practice standards, changes to regulation and legislation, and other news affecting nursing practice.

The Standardis emailed to members and subscribers monthly.

Subscribe Now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: November 2023
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/november-2023/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: October 2023
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/october-2023/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: September 2023 - Special Edition
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/sept-2023-special-edition/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: September 2023
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/september-2023/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: July 2023
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/july-2023/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: June 2023
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/june-2023/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: May 2023
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/may-2023/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: March 2023
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/march-2023/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: March 2023 - Special Edition
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/march-2023-special-edition/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: January 2023
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/January-2023/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: December 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/december-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: November 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/november-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: September 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/september-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: August 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/august-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: June 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/june-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: May 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/may-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: March 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/march-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: February 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/February-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: January 2022
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/magazines-newsletters/the-standard/January-2022/
Main content not found.
------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Volunteer Opportunities
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/get-involved/
Title: Volunteer Opportunities

Patient safety is a collective responsibility that involves partnership and support from nurses, educators, students, the public, and other stakeholders. CNO is committed to a whole-system approach to nursing regulation and working with you to make a greater collective impact on the patient care system.

As a member of CNO, you can actively participate in the regulatory processes that keep the public safe. By volunteering for one of our committees, focus groups or special projects, you help to inform the development of many high-profile and important projects, while showing professional leadership and building your relationships within the profession.

Volunteers interested in the following opportunities must be current members in good standing with CNO.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Develop questions for the NCLEX-RN
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/get-involved/volunteers/
Title: Develop questions for the NCLEX-RN

Canadian Registered Nurses are being sought for the NCLEX Item Development Program. The National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) develops the NCLEX-RN used to measure competencies needed to perform safely and effectively as an entry-level registered nurse. An important step in this process is the NCLEX Item Development program, a key component in creating and maintaining high quality examination items. The development of the NCLEX examination depends on qualified registered nurse volunteers from all jurisdictions that use the NCLEX for entry to practice.

By volunteering, you may be selected to participate as an item writer (RN educator with Master's degree) or item reviewer (practising RNs).

Volunteers must not have participated in exam development or related activities (for example, as an invigilator, proctor or participation in exam courses or guides) within the previous 24 months.

Apply to be a volunteer now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Develop questions for the REx-PN
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/get-involved/rex-pn-item-development-program--rpns/
Title: Develop questions for the REx-PN

National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) is seeking Ontario nurses who are familiar with entry-level RPN practice to help develops test items for the REx-PN exam. NCSBN develops the REx-PN, which measures the competencies entry-level RPNs need to perform safely and effectively. NCSBN’s REx-PN Item Development Program is a key component of creating and maintaining high-quality exam items. The Item Development Program depends on the participation of qualified nurse volunteers from Ontario and B.C., where the REx-PN is used for entry to practice.

By volunteering, you may be selected to participate as an item writer (RPN educator), an item reviewer (practicing nurse) or a French translator (French-speaking Ontario nurses).

Volunteers must not have participated in exam development or related activities (for example, as an invigilator, proctor or developing exam courses or guides) within the previous 24 months.

Apply to be a volunteer now.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Help develop questions for CNPE
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/get-involved/help-develop-questions-for-cpnre-np-exams/
Title: Help develop questions for CNPE

Yardstick Assessment Strategies Inc.has volunteer positions for Nurse Practitioners from a range of practice environments who may be interested in developing questions for the Canadian Nurse Practitioner Examination (CNPE).

Nurse Practitioners currently in direct practice are encouraged to apply.

Contact the College

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Academic Reference Group: Recruiting new members
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/get-involved/academic-reference-group-recruiting-new-members/
Title: Academic Reference Group: Recruiting new members

The Academic Reference Group (ARG) is comprised of representatives from practical nursing (PN), baccalaureate (BN), and nurse practitioner (NP) programs that provide entry level nursing education in Ontario, as well as CNO staff. The group provides a mechanism for CNO and educators to engage, share information and collaborate with each other on strategic and operational matters. This collaboration is used to inform nursing regulation and supports nursing educators with nursing program delivery.

Membership in the group is voluntary and is for a three-year term, with an option for a one-year renewal. The group meets virtually for a two-hour meeting ever quarter. Members might also be updated by email throughout the year.

We are looking for applicants who:

have a range of knowledge and experience of nursing education, either from PN, BN or NP programsrepresent geographical areas from across the provinceare bilingual, as an assetare professors and/or program administratorsoffer unique perspectives from diverse members of the academic communityare in good standing with CNO

Complete andsubmit the application form, including pasting your resume.

We thank you for your interest in this volunteer position. We will contact you if you are selected for the recruitment process.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Develop exam questions for Nurse Practitioner registration exams
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/get-involved/develop-exam-questions-np-registration-exams/
Title: Develop exam questions for Nurse Practitioner registration exams

The American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certification Board (AANPCB) is looking for Nurse Practitioners (NPs) to help with exam development opportunities. AANPCB develops the Family Nurse Practitioner (FNP) exam and Adult-Gerontology Primary Care Nurse Practitioner (a-GNP) exam, both used to measure competencies needed to perform safely and effectively as a Nurse Practitioner in Ontario.

The board is looking for Nurse Practitioners with expertise in:

Adult-GerontologyFamily/All Ages

You must have current clinical practice as an NP. You don’t need experience in an NP faculty role, but experience with, and knowledge of, NPs at the entry-to-practice level is essential.

If you want more information, please emaileducationvolunteers@cnomail.org.

To apply, please completethis formand submit it toeducationvolunteers@cnomail.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Participate in NCLEX-RN expert panels
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/get-involved/participate-nclex-rn-expert-panels/
Title: Participate in NCLEX-RN expert panels

National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) is recruiting qualified Ontario Registered Nurses (RNs) who work with entry-level RNs for two meetings that will take place in Chicago, IL.:

NCLEX-RN Practice Analysis Expert Panel – October 3-5, 2023NCLEX-RN Knowledge, Skills and Abilities Expert Panel – November 14-16, 2023

NCSBN conducts both an RN Practice Analysis and an RN Knowledge, Skills and Abilities meeting every three years. This is to ensure that the NCLEX-RN exam continues to reflect current nursing practice. Both meetings will be composed of a variety of nurses, representing the NCLEX test user areas and various clinical specialties and practice settings. Travel-related expenses, such as prepaid airfare and lodging, will be covered by NCSBN.

We are looking for applicants who:

are RNs registered with CNO in good standinghave current clinical practicesupervise, precept and/or mentor entry-level RNs (within their first 12 months of practice)have not participated in nursing examination development activities, including development of nursing exam preparation guides and courses, in the previous two years (this does not include volunteer activities with NCSBN)can travel to Chicago (released from work to participate)

Please submit your resume to Donna Rawlin, Team Lead, Education Program atdrawlin@cnomail.orgas soon as possible, withJuly 5as the final deadline.

CNO will review the applications to ensure applicants meet the eligibility criteria and are available on the panel dates before submitting names to NCSBN.

NCSBN will contact the nominated nurses for the application review process. Based on the number of applications, as well as the selection criteria, not all applicants maybe asked to serve.

July 5, 2023

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nursing Links
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/nursing-links/
Title: Nursing Links

Ontario HealthConsent and Capacity BoardInformation and Privacy CommissionerLegislative Assembly of OntarioMinistry of Health and Long-Term CareHealth Workforce Planning and Regulatory AffairsOntario Statutes and Regulations (e-Laws)

Council of Ontario UniversitiesCouncil of Ontario University Programs in NursingNursing Education Initiative

Canadian Union of Public Employees (CUPE)Nurse Practitioners’ Association of OntarioOntario Council of Hospital Unions (OCHU)Ontario Nurses' AssociationRegistered Practical Nurses Association of Ontario - WeRPNRegistered Nurses' Association of OntarioService Employees International Union (SEIU)

Health Profession Regulators of OntarioCouncil on Licensure, Enforcement and RegulationInternational Council of NursesNational Council of State Boards of Nursing(U.S.)Canadian Council for Practical Nurse Regulators(CCPNR)Canadian Council of Registered Nurse Regulators(CCRNR)

College of Audiologists and Speech-Language Pathologists of OntarioCollege of Chiropodists of OntarioCollege of Chiropractors of OntarioCollege of Dental Hygienists of OntarioCollege of Dental Technologists of OntarioCollege of Denturists of OntarioCollege of Dietitians of OntarioCollege of Homeopaths of OntarioCollege of Kinesiologists of OntarioCollege of Massage Therapists of OntarioCollege of Medical Laboratory Technologists of OntarioCollege of Medical Radiation Technologists of OntarioCollege of Midwives of OntarioCollege of Occupational Therapists of OntarioCollege of Opticians of OntarioCollege of OptometristsCollege of Physicians and Surgeons of OntarioCollege of Physiotherapists of OntarioCollege of Psychologists of OntarioCollege of Registered Psychotherapists of OntarioCollege of Respiratory Therapists of OntarioCollege of Traditional Chinese Medical Practitioners and AcupuncturistsOntario College of PharmacistsRoyal College of Dental Surgeons of OntarioCollege of Naturopaths of Ontario

College of Registered Nurses of Newfoundland and LabradorNova Scotia College of NursingOccupational Health Nurses Association of Nova ScotiaCollege of Registered Nurses of Prince Edward IslandNurses Association of New BrunswickOrdre des infirmières et infirmiers du QuébecCollege of Registered Nurses of ManitobaCollege of Registered Nurses of SaskatchewanCollege of Registered Nurses of AlbertaBritish Columbia College of Nurses and MidwivesRegistered Nurses Association of Northwest Territories and NunavutGovernment of Nunavut – Nunavut NursesYukon Registered Nurses Association

College of Licensed Practical Nurses of Newfoundland and LabradorAssociation of New Brunswick Licensed Practical NursesNova Scotia College of NursingCollege of Licensed Practical Nurses of Prince Edward Island (CLPNPEI)Ordre des infirmières et infirmiers auxiliaires du QuébecCollege of Licensed Practical Nurses of ManitobaSaskatchewan Association of Licensed Practical NursesCollege of Licensed Practical Nurses of AlbertaBritish Columbia College of Nurses and MidwivesGovernment of Northwest Territories, Licensed Practical Nurse LicenceGovernment of Yukon Licensed Practical Nurse LicenseGovernment of Nunavut – Nunavut Nurses

Canadian Indigenous Nurses AssociationCanadian Nurses AssociationCanadian Nursing Students Association

Canadian Institute for Health InformationCanadian Medical AssociationCanadian Nurses Protective SocietyCanadian Public Health AssociationCARE Centre  for Internationally Educated NursesHealth CanadaOntario Hospital AssociationOntario Medical AssociationWorld Health Organization

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Pandemic Planning
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/pandemic-planning/
Title: Pandemic Planning

Pandemic planning is a best practice and nurses play a key role in this process. Proper planning is key to determining how a facility and its nursing staff will manage in emergency circumstances.

In the event that a pandemic is declared by the provincial Ministry of Health, CNO has a number of resources that can help nurses understand their responsibilities during a large-scale health emergency.

These resources will help you learn what CNO expects from nurses during a pandemic, as well as the practice standards and guidelines that are particularly relevant to nursing during such an emergency.

Take action when patient safety may be compromised. This includes identifying strategies to prepare for, reduce and resolve situations that may leave patients without the nursing services they need.Role model and follow public health directives that keep patients safe.Self-reflect, determine learning needs and actively updating knowledge and skills to maintain continued competence.Practice according to CNO's standards and guidelines during the pandemic. However, if there is a report or complaint, CNO will consider the context of the situation.

During a pandemic a nurse may be assigned or deployed to other roles or duties. In these situations, nurses are accountable to ensure they have the knowledge, skill and judgment, and the appropriate authority before performing any activity or procedure.

Nurses deployed to an unfamiliar area must:

Perform activities they are competent to do.Find ways to address their learning needs specific to the new practice setting.Seek role clarity and discuss their competency and expected responsibilities with their employer.Seek advice, collaborate and support their health care team to uphold safe patient careWork together with other health care experts to improve their patients’ care.

COVID-19 Practice resourcesCOVID-19 Vaccination informationCOVID-19 Vaccination FAQs

Code of ConductScope of PracticeUnderstanding your scope of practice and your nursing accountabilitiesAccountabilities when refusing assignments or discontinuing nursing servicesFAQs: Disagreeing with the care plan

Ministry of Health and Long-Term CareEmergency planning and preparednessOntario health plan for an influenza pandemicUpdate on the Distribution of Rapid Antigen Tests in Ontario under the Provincial Antigen Screening Program

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: COVID-19: Practice resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/pandemic-planning/covid-19-practice-resources/
Title: COVID-19: Practice resources

This page provides COVID-19 practice information. In addition to the information below, CNO’sPractice Supportstaff can help with your nursing practice-related inquires. Please review our statement on the standard of care in theStandards & Guidelinessection of this website.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: COVID-19 Vaccination information
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/pandemic-planning/covid-19-vaccination-information/
Title: COVID-19 Vaccination information

This page answers questions about the administration of COVID-19 vaccines in Ontario.

The Ministry of Health is working with vaccination sites to deliver the COVID-19 vaccine to the public. Individuals wanting to help with the vaccination efforts can register and apply through theOntario Matching Portal.

During the vaccine rollout, it is important to continue to followpublic health measuresto stop the spread of COVID-19.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQ’s COVID-19 Vaccinations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/pandemic-planning/covid-19-vaccination-information/faqs-covid-vaccinations/
Title: FAQ’s COVID-19 Vaccinations

The Ministry of Health has renewed the exemptions in theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991(RHPA) that assists in the administration of the COVID-19 vaccine.

TheControlled Actsregulations under the RHPA allows any person to administer a COVID-19 vaccine, if a  physician, registered nurse, nurse practitioner, or pharmacist is present and accessible to the person administering the vaccine.

Below are answers to common questions about this authority. For other nursing practice inquiries, please consult ourpractice resourcesor contact CNO’sPractice Qualityteam.

The exemptions enable all RNs, RPNs, pharmacy professionals and other individuals to administer the COVID-19 vaccine without an order.

They also allowsany personto administer the vaccine when engaged as part of the vaccination rollout by an organization (e.g., outpatient clinic, public health unit, etc.) or an entity that has an agreement with the Minister of Health related to the administration of the COVID-19 vaccine. This only applies if a physician, registered nurse, nurse practitioner, or pharmacist is present and accessible to the person administering the vaccine to discuss questions relating to, or give directions with respect to, the administration of the vaccine.

The RHPA lists controlled acts that are restricted to certain individuals to support safe patient care. An example of a controlled act is “administering a substance by injection.” Controlled acts are restricted because the public risk they pose if performed by a person that does not have the proper training.

RNs and RPNs can administer the COVID-19 vaccine without an order as long as they are working or volunteering with an organization or an entity that has an agreement with the Minister of Health related to the administration of the COVID-19 vaccine. For example, municipally run vaccination sites, hospital sites, mobile vaccination sites, pharmacies, clinics, primary care settings and community locations such as community health centres and aboriginal health access centres.

CNO would not specifically prevent this practice as long as it is done in alignment with the principles outlined in the standards, such as theMedicationpractice standard.CNO’sstandards and guidelinesare broad and principle based so they can be applied to all nurses in all practice settings.

You are encouraged to review your employer’s policies and work collaboratively with your team to address any gaps in practice to ensure safe patient care and medication practices.

Some things to consider when creating your policies around this practice may be, however not limited to:

How are the syringes clearly and appropriately labelled, to ensure safety?What other strategies can your healthcare team implement to ensure that the patient is receiving the right medication?How will is be ensured that specific requirements, such as temperature for example, are maintained as per the manufacturer’s directions?How will each step be documented to ensure accountability?How have you addressed any outstanding concerns with your employer in the interest of safe patient care?

Yes, you can help.

To help with the administration of the COVID-19 vaccine, you can register and apply through theOntario’s Matching Portal.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/web-qas/
Title: FAQs

While most nurses do not harm their patients, CNO does respond to several cases of patient sexual abuse by nurses each year.

Between 2000 and 2017, CNO received 280 complaints and reports related to sexual abuse. The number of complaints and reports CNO receives has been increasing since 2015. In 2018, there were 49 sexual abuse matters reported to CNO. We suspect this is an underestimate of actual incidences of patient sexual abuse. Research shows that patients do not report sexual abuse by health professionals for many reasons, including fear of not being believed, fear of repercussions and stigmatization associated with sexual abuse.TheSexual Abuse Task Force Report(2016) estimated that 200,000 Ontario patients experienced sexual abuse at the hands of health care professionals, including nurses, over a six-year period.

CNO exists to ensure Ontarians receive safe nursing care. We believe that even one case of sexual abuse is one too many.

Hugging can be acceptable in some contexts, and if it is in the patient’s therapeutic interests. For example, it may be appropriate to offer a hug when a patient receives distressing news. In all situations, always ask for permission: for example, “Can I give you a hug?”

It is important to remember that in the nurse-patient relationship, nurses hold a position of power. Given this, maintaining professional boundaries is the nurse’s responsibility. This includes physical boundaries.

CNO practice standards,Code of Conduct,Consent, and theTherapeutic Nurse-Client Relationshipprovides more information on professional boundaries.

Nurses care best for patients when they take care of themselves. Research shows that physical and emotional fatigue reduces cognitive functioning including decision-making, memory and attention. Professionals are also less likely to violate the boundaries of others, to make ethical errors, or to misuse power when they are emotionally and physically well.

Research also shows nurses’ well-being not only benefits patients; it gives nurses increased job and life satisfaction, and better physical health. It’s important to step back and identify times when stressors in your personal and professional lives need attention. CNO developed a fact sheet with ideas for nurses reflection, and suggestions from our research about to respond to stress.

While therapeutic relationships can bring about feelings of closeness, intimacy or  attraction, it is the nurse’s responsibility to maintain professional boundaries and not pursue these feelings.

In the nurse-patient relationship, nurses hold a position of power by virtue of having: professional knowledge and skills patients rely on for their well-being, such as performing physical assessments and accessing patient’s personal health information. Because of this power, any sexual or romantic relationship a nurse has with a patient is abuse and professional misconduct. It does not matter if the patient agrees to the sexual acts.

To manage a situation like this, you can:

Be clear with yourself about your feelings, and any limitations or risks they may create. Self-reflection is important: recognizing these feelings lets you take proactive steps to ensure you don’t cross a boundarySpeak with a colleague or a managerConsider if another nurse ought to provide care for the patient

Remember, the law says that someone is considered a patient for one year after the nurse-patient relationship ends. This means you cannot have a relationship at any time while caring for the patient, or for a full year after care has ended.

The data tells us most nurses do not harm their patients. Yet there are two profiles of nurses who sexually abuse patients. Some nurses are predators, intentionally harming patients. Other nurses begin a sexual relationship with a patient, which by law, is sexual abuse. Both cause physical and emotional harm.

Nurses can usetherapeutic communicationto address this misperception with patients. Nurses have an accountability to provide clear and timely information and talk to patients in ways they can understand. Here are some guiding questions for nurses to consider when performing a nursing intervention:

Have I obtainedinformed consent?How do I best communicate to the patient about what they should expect before, during and after the intervention?Is my communication clear and timely?Does my patient understand the intervention?If I were the patient experiencing this intervention, how would I expect to be treated?

Yes, consent is always needed before usingtherapeutic touch. Nurses have ethical and legal obligations to obtain consent for all nursing interventions. By doing so, nurses demonstrate patient-centred care. Asking forconsentactively includes the patient as a partner in their care and shows sensitivity and respect for their choices.

Nurses have anobligation to reportsuspected patient sexual abuse by a health care professional to the relevant regulatory college, if the staff member is a regulated health care professional. If the staff member is an unregulated health professional, nurses should comply with their employer’s reporting policies. Nurses are encouraged to review both their employer policies and relevant legislative requirements as it relates to their reporting obligations.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/sexual-abuse-prevention/resources/
Title: Resources

Self-carePatient safety cultureVulnerable patientsWarning signs

Code of ConductConflict Prevention and ManagementTherapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship

Abuse Prevention: One Is One Too ManyCase scenariosSexual Abuse Prevention: Employer's ToolkitFAQsFile a ReportMandatory Reporting: A process guide for employers, facility operators and nursesPreventing Client AbuseProtect the Public: Sexual Abuse of PatientsReference Document: Professional MisconductSexual Abuse Prevention Webcast

CNO's response to Minister Hoskins’ letter regarding sexual abuse of patientsTo Zero: Independent Report of the Minister's Task Force on the Prevention of Sexual Abuse of Patients and the Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: One Is One Too Many
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/protect-public/preventing-harm/abuse-prevention/
Title: One Is One Too Many

One Is One Too Many is a valuable tool for any organization employing nurses that is concerned about issues involving client abuse. It was created by the College in response to a government directive that all health colleges provide member education about abuse.

The One is One Too Many program provides powerful re-creations of situations in which abuse occurs, as well as guides and materials to facilitate discussion about what tools nurses need to stop abuse.

Topics include:

Dealing with challenging situationsRecognizing and responding to abusePlus many other valuable abuse prevention practices

The complete One is One Too Many program includes:

a video/DVD with scenarios and commentary from nursesa self-directedNurses’ Workbookwith lessons and case scenariosa comprehensiveFacilitator’s Guidefor group learning





















Maintaining Boundaries - Learning ModulePreventing Client Abuse - Fact SheetOne is One Too Many Reflective Exercises

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: 
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/
Title: Become a Nurse

All Registered Nurses, Registered Practical Nurses and Nurse Practitioners practicing within Ontario are members of the College of Nurses of Ontario.

For more information, readApplying to the College online.

Only members of CNO are allowed to refer to themselves as nurses in Ontario. A valid certificate of registration from CNO is required of all nurses who wish to practice nursing in Ontario and perform the procedures in theControlled Actsthat are authorized to nursing.

Applicants to CNO can be divided into four groups:

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Applying to CNO online
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/applying-to-the-college-online/
Title: Applying to CNO online

CNO has an online portal to offer more efficient services.

The online portal is available in English and French.

Here are some transactions you can do through the self-service platform:

Set up an account and submit your applications onlineUpdate your personal information (for example, address, email)Pay fees and receive receiptsSchedule exams and request accommodationsUpdate application information regarding nursing education, nursing practice, nursing registration in other jurisdictions and nursing examinationsUpload certain documents to support an open applicationView status of documents received from third parties or uploaded by youReceive updates on a message centre where CNO posts notices relevant to their application

CNO is dedicated to providing customer-centric services while remaining fully committed to public safety.

Helpful Hints for Creating an Account

Frequently Asked Questions

New police criminal record check process

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Helpful hints for creating an account
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/applying-to-the-college-online/helpful-hints/
Title: Helpful hints for creating an account

The information on this page is for applicants who applied to the College before the online portal was available and do not yet have an online account.

If you have an application currently open with the College and you would like to view the status of your application online, all you will have to do is create an online account.

Create your online account bylogging into Maintain Your Membership.Select Login to My AccountOn the login page, select "Don't have an account? Click here." This will take you to a Privacy and Terms of Use page.  Read the information and select “Continue”On the Create Account page, please enter your date of birth (dd/mm/yyyy) and the email address we currently have on file for you.Once you have created your online account, select “View my applications” to see the status of your current open application.Do not create a new application.Please use your email address that the College has on record to create your online account.  If you use a different email address to create your account, you will not be able to access your current open application.If you no longer have access to the email address we have one file for you, pleasecontact Customer Serviceto update your email address before you create an online account.If you want to change your email address, please change it only after you have created your online account using the email address we currently have on file for you. Once you have done that, you can update your email address using the “Update my personal information” selection in the online portal.If you have entered your e-mail address correctly and you received an error message saying “Please enter a valid e-mail address”, it is possible that you are adding a space when you enter your email address. The space counts as a character, so the system will not recognize your email address. Please re-enter your email address again, without the space.





------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Applying online: Frequently asked questions
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/applying-to-the-college-online/frequently-asked-questions/
Title: Applying online: Frequently asked questions

The following are answers to questions you may have about CNO's online application process.

Go toMaintain Your Membershipand select “Login to my account." If you already have an account with CNO, login using your email address and password and then select "create a new application."

If you do not have an account with CNO, select "Don't have an account" to create one. After you have created an account, you can then proceed with creating a new application.

Return to theMaintain Your Membershippage and click on “Forgot my password.”

Contact ourCustomer Servicecentre.

The new online portal does not yet have a reinstatement feature. ReadApplying for Reinstatementto find out what you need to do.

If you have received your advisory report from NNAS, then you can use the online portal to create an account and complete your application. You must have your NNAS application and ID numbers to be able to complete your online application with CNO.

If you haven’t received your advisory report, you must first apply toNNASto get your advisory report.

It depends on if you are an applicant who completed your nursing education in Ontario, another province in Canada or internationally.

For international applicants, read the question above. For all other applicants, go toMaintain Your Membership, select “create an account” and follow the steps to apply.

First check to make sure you used the correct payment method and typed in your card number and other details correctly. If you still get an error message, contact ourCustomer Servicecentre.

Contact ourCustomer Servicecentre.

Contact ourCustomer Servicecentre.

You will not be able to do this update online. Contact ourCustomer Servicecentre to find out what you will need to do.

Your requirement will have “Outstanding” noted beside it if CNO has not received the related information or if the information has been received but it is still being reviewed by CNO.

If you have a General Application Class open, you can apply to the Temporary Class and work towards meeting the requirements for Temporary Registration.

CNO will close your application for Temporary Class if you fail the registration exam twice for the category to which you applied to. For example, if you failed the NCLEX-RN exam two times or more, you will not be eligible for registration as an RN in the Temporary Class. Please note that your application fee is non-refundable.

If you have already passed the registration exam, then you need to complete your general class registration requirements.

Once your account is created and you have completed your application by paying your fee, youcan update your application.

Applicants with an open application may upload the following documents:

Competency Assessment Supplement (CAS)Authorization to WorkName ChangeAccommodation RequestOffer of Employment for Temporary Class applicationsAuthorization to release informationWithdrawal Application formImmigration Authorization to Practice – Consent

No. Documents from third parties (e.g. education transcripts or verification of nursing practice in another jurisdiction, verification of registration from another jurisdiction) must be directly sent to CNO by the third party. CNO will then update the portal with the document status. Please do not upload documents sent by third parties.

An Offer of Employment letter mustonlybe uploaded by an applicant with an open Temporary Class application. Read ourTemporary Class Guidefor more information.

You will not have access to your NNAS documents in the portal. Once you have applied to CNO, NNAS sends us a copy of your Advisory Report, along with images of the documents received by NNAS in support of your application.  You will only be able to view a list of documents that have been received from you directly or other third parties, along with the status of the documents.  Note - You can request copies of any documents that form part of your CNO application at any time during the application process.

Applicants who are Ontario graduates are not required to declare or add nursing education. CNO receives a list of nursing graduates directly from the school and updates your application based on confirmation that you completed your nursing program.

We strongly encourage you to not update any information or ask CNO to correct a record if you have recently applied as it takes up to 15 days for your records to be updated once you create an application.  Please wait until after 15 days after creating a new application to update your information.

No, information should only relate to nursing education, nursing practice, nursing registration and nursing examinations.

If any have a concern about   information in your application , please contact Customer Service by clicking on the appropriate link found under the section that is incorrect (nursing education, nursing employment, other nursing registrations, nursing examinations) and providing the details in the message box. Please do not call CNO as we are not able to update information over the phone.

Please carefully review the entire list. If you are still not able to locate your school when declaring a new nursing education record, you may scroll to the bottom of the school list and select: Not listed (enter below),  to manually enter the name of the school.

Please refer to your Message Centre for information regarding your next steps and how to submit all relevant documents to CNO.

Please contact Customer Service by clicking on the appropriate link found under the section that is incorrect (nursing education, nursing employment, other nursing registrations, nursing examinations) and providing the details in the message box. Please do not call CNO as we are not able to update information over the phone.

You may declare new nursing education only once you have completed the program or all relevant courses.

CNO has stopped mailing letters to applicants and now sends correspondence through the message centre in the online portal. You will not be able to reply or use the message centre to communicate with CNO – it is your personal online mailbox where CNO will send you updates about, and next steps for, your application.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration guides
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/
Title: Registration guides



Ontario

Canada (outside Ontario)

Outside Canada



Nurse Practitioner



Temporary Class

Reinstatement

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Ontario
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/ontario/
Title: Ontario

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Introduction
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/ontario/ontario12/
Title: Introduction

Welcome to the College of Nurses of Ontario’s guide to registration for nurses educated at an Ontario school of nursing.

This information is intended for individuals who have graduated or are about to graduate from anapproved nursing programat an Ontario educational institution.

Please return to theHow to Applyhomepage if you are:

a recent graduate of a nursing program outside Ontariocurrently registered to practise as a nurse in another Canadian province or territoryapplying to practise as a Nurse Practitioner in Ontarioan internationally educated nursewho has never been registered within Canada.

This guide breaks down the registration process, emphasizing the requirements that all nurses must meet and the steps required to become a member of the College.

We have made every effort to ensure the accuracy of this information, but pleasecontact the Collegeif you have any questions or discover an error.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Getting Started
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/ontario/getting-started-ontario/
Title: Getting Started

Know which documents you will need to support your application when you begin.

To start the application process, you will need proof of citizenship. Some documents, such as the police criminal record check, involve a third party to send them. Make sure you plan for these documents to prevent any delays at the end of the application process.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practicing as an RN or RPN in Ontario
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/ontario/practising-as-an-rn-or-rpn-in-ontario/
Title: Practicing as an RN or RPN in Ontario

Registering with CNO is a legal requirement for anyone who wishes to practice nursing in Ontario.

Only nurses registered with CNO can practice nursing in Ontario and use the titles “nurse,” “Registered Nurse (RN),” “Registered Practical Nurse (RPN),” or “Nurse Practitioner (NP).”

It is illegal for anyone topractice nursingor use any of these titles in Ontario without a valid certificate of registration issued by CNO.

Your status as an RN or RPN informs the public that all individuals who identify themselves as nurses have the knowledge, skill and judgment required to provide safe and ethical nursing care.

The majority of CNO applicants enter theGeneral Class, the most common class of registration for nurses in Ontario.

Applicants who wish to begin nursing before completing their registration requirements for the general class also have the option of applying to theTemporary Class, provided they meet the Temporary Class registration  requirements.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Beginning the Application Process
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/ontario/beginning-the-application-process/
Title: Beginning the Application Process

Applying to the College is now an online process.

The application process for most Ontario nursing graduates begins when your nursing school informs the College that you are about to complete your program.

After that, the College will send you an email to advise you to create an account through theonline portal.

When you create your account in the online portal, make sure that your personal information is correct and that it matches the name on the supporting documents you submit to the College. If your name has changed, you should submit a written request for name change to the College. Your requests must include:

your former namea copy of a legal name change document, such as a marriage certificate, divorce decree, or change of name certificateyour new name spelled exactly as it appears on your legal name change documentyour signatureyour mailing address and phone number

Once you have created an account, you can begin your application by logging in and clicking on “create a new application.”

NOTE:

During your application, if you answer “yes” to any question on the declaration, the College will require you to provide additional information with your application, including a personal statement and supporting documentation separately. These cannot be submitted online. This information will be reviewed by the College’s Executive Director and may be referred to the Registration Committee, which will extend the time it takes to process your application.The College will begin processing your application only after it receives your completed application andfee. The application fee is non-refundable.While you can submit yourproof of citizenship, residency status, or authorization to practise nursing in Ontariodocumentation at any time during the online application process, it is recommended you submit this documentation with your application. If you do not submit them during your initial online application, you will need to send them to the College separately.Making a false or misleading statement or representation on your application or supporting documents may result in the cancellation of your application for registration and/or cancellation of any certificates that may be issued.

Completing the registration process can take from three to 18 months, but this is a guideline only. It is your responsibility to ensure the timely delivery of all required documentation and other information requested by the College.

Factors that may delay your registration include:

graduating from a program that doesn’t meet entry-to-practice competenciesfailing to provideevidence of having practised nursingor graduated from a nursing program within the past three yearsfailing to provide evidence that demonstrateslanguage proficiency in either English or Frenchthe time needed totranslate official documentsinto either English or Frenchfailing to successfully complete the requiredregistration examinationorjurisprudence examinationinformation aboutthe applicant’s conduct, competence or healththat may require further review and follow-up.failing to produce other documents requested by the College.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration Requirements
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/ontario/registration-requirements-for-rns-and-rpns/
Title: Registration Requirements

During the application process, the College assesses all applicants to determine whether they meet the following registration requirements.

If the College finds that you do not meet one or more of these requirements, then you may be asked to provide more information or do something (such as complete an evaluation or additional education) that allows you to meet those requirements.

You have the right torequest a review of your applicationif you want to appeal any decision made by College staff or the Registration Committee concerning your application.

SeeRegistration Requirementsfor further information about each of these requirements.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Examinations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/ontario/examinations/
Title: Examinations

All applicants to the College must successfully complete theregistration examinationapproved by Council for the category to which they are applying.

Both exams consist of a series of questions designed to measure the competencies of nurses at the start of their practice.

The Collegemustreceive your examination application and payment on or before the deadline to apply, regardless of the postmark. Allow at least 10 days for your mailed payment to reach the College.

In addition to the registration exam, you must successfully complete a separate jurisprudence exam designed to evaluate your knowledge and understanding of the laws, regulations, and College by-laws, practice standards and guidelines that govern the nursing profession in Ontario.

TheRN/RPN Jurisprudence Examis completed online and can be completed at any time. Once you have submitted your application form and fees, you will receive information about how to access the secure testing site.

You must provide an email address to the College to receive information about your jurisprudence exam. This email address must be unique to you (i.e., it cannot be a shared address with other applicants to the College).

Visit ourExaminationssection for more about the registration and jurisprudence exams, including fees, refund policies and special accommodation requests.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Initial Registration
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/ontario/initial-registration/
Title: Initial Registration

Registering with the College is now an online process

When you have successfully met all registration requirements, you cancomplete your registration online and pay the applicable fee.

Once you have completed your registration, then you can confirm your registered status by going toFind a Nurse, the College’s online register, and searching for your name.

Remember:

If the name on any of your supporting documents is different from the name appearing on your application, then please send a photocopy of your birth certificate, marriage certificate, divorce decree or legal name change along with a letter requesting a name change.If during the application process the College receives any information that could affect your ability to practise nursing, the College will review the information and may extend the time needed to process your application.Your application with the College will remain open as long as there is evidence of progress towards meeting registration requirements. If there has been no activity on your application for two years, then the College will consider the application closed. Once that occurs, you will need to submit a new application along with fees and documentation if you wish to register with the College.Note that criminal record checks are only valid for six months from date of issue, so if a previously submitted criminal record check has expired, you will need to apply for, and submit, a new one.

If I become eligible for registration near the end of the year and I want to register before the end of the year, will I have to pay two fees – one for this year and one for the next year?

It is your choice whether to register with the College this year or next year. The annual fee expires on December 31 every year and it is not pro-rated. This means that if you choose to become registered to practice for the remainder of this year, then you will need to pay the registration fee for this year and then pay another fee to renew your registration for the next year by December 31 of this year.

If you plan to register next year, all requirements for registration must still be met at the time of your registration. You must register before any requirements expire.The College cannot reverse your registration once it has been issued.If you do plan on practicing nursing this year, you must first register with the College, no matter how short the timeframe.

Do you have any other questions about your examinations or the registration process?Contact the College.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Canada (outside Ontario)
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/
Title: Canada (outside Ontario)

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Introduction
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/ontario11/
Title: Introduction

Welcome to the CNO’s guide to registration for Canadian applicants wanting to apply for registration as a Registered Nurse (RN) or Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) in Ontario.

This information is intended for:

individuals who have graduated from a Canadian nursing program that prepared them to practice as an RN or RPN outside of Ontario (e.g., diploma, or baccalaureate degree). This does not include bridging programsRNs and RPNs who are currently registered to practice in another Canadian province or territory at the time they apply to CNO. This means that if you are applying as an RN, you must be registered to practice as an RN in another Canadian jurisdiction. If you are applying as an RPN, you must be registered to practice as an RPN in the other Canadian jurisdiction

If you intend to apply to CNO and your registration as a nurse in another Canadian province or territory is no longer active (e.g., expired, cancelled, resigned), consider renewing or reinstating your registration as a practicing RN or RPN.  Proof of your current practicing registration in Canada will help you meet specific requirements more quickly without the need to request documents from third parties.

Please return to theHow to Applyhomepage if you are:

a recent graduate of an Ontario nursing programan internationally educated RN or RPN who has never been registered to practice nursing in another Canadian province or territory or who is not currently registered to practice nursing in another Canadian province or territory (for example, nurses with expired, cancelled or resigned certificates of registration)applying to CNO to practice as a Nurse Practitioner (NP).

This guide breaks down the registration process, emphasizing the requirements all nurses must meet and the steps required for registration with CNO.

If you are an NP, please review theregistration guide for Nurse Practitionersfor information.

We have made every effort to ensure the accuracy of this information, but pleasecontact CNOif you have any questions or discover an error.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Getting Started
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/getting-started-canada/
Title: Getting Started

Know which documents you will need to support your application when you begin.

To start the application process, you will need proof of citizenship. Some documents, such as the police criminal record check, involve a third party to send them. Make sure you plan for these documents to prevent any delays at the end of the application process.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practicing as an RN or RPN in Ontario
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/practising-as-an-rn-or-rpn-in-ontario/
Title: Practicing as an RN or RPN in Ontario

Registering with CNO is a legal requirement for anyone who wishes to practice nursing in Ontario.

Only nurses registered with CNO can practice nursing in Ontario and use the titles “nurse,” “Registered Nurse,” “Registered Practical Nurse,” “Nurse Practitioner,” “RN,” “RPN,” or “NP.”

It is illegal for anyone to practice nursing or use any of these titles in Ontario without a valid certificate of registration issued by CNO.

Your status as an RN or RPN informs the public that all individuals who identify themselves as nurses have gained the knowledge, skill and judgment required to provide safe and ethical nursing care.

The majority of CNO applicants enter theGeneral Class, the most common class of registration for nurses in Ontario.

Applicants who wish to begin nursing before completing their registration requirements for the general class also have the option of joining theTemporary Classprovided they meet the Temporary Class registration requirements.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Beginning the Application Process
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/beginning-the-application-process/
Title: Beginning the Application Process - Canada (Outside Ontario)

The application process for Canadian applicants begins when youcreate an online applicationwith the College.

In the case of nurses already registered in another province or territory, there are also verification forms that must be forwarded to the appropriate third party (employers, regulatory bodies) and returned by those third parties to the College. The College must receive all documents from third parties directly from the source. Third-party information submitted by the applicant will not be considered.

During your application, if you answer “yes” to any question on the declaration, the College will require you to provide additional information with your application, including a personal statement and supporting documentation separately. These cannot be submitted online. This information will be reviewed by the College’s Executive Director and may be referred to the Registration Committee, which will extend the time it takes to process your application.

The College’s role in the application process begins when it receives the following:

a completed applicationallapplicable feesverification of course completion and transcript request from a recognized nursing school, in the case of recent nursing school graduates (this informationmustcome directly from the nursing school in an official sealed envelope bearing the school’s official letterhead, logo or stamp).

Once the College receives and reviews this information, you will receive a message from the College that will tell you if any further information is needed to assess your application.

The application fee is non-refundable.

Completing the registration process can take from three to 18 months, but this is a guideline only. It is your responsibility to ensure the timely delivery of all required documentation and other information requested by the College.

Factors that may delay your registration include:

graduating from a program that doesn’t meet entry-to-practice competenciesfailing to provideevidence of having practised nursingor graduated from a nursing program within the past three yearsfailing to provide evidence that demonstrateslanguage proficiency in either English or Frenchthe time needed to translate official documentstranslate official documentsinto either English or Frenchfailing to successfully complete the requiredregistration examinationorjurisprudence examinationinformation aboutconduct, competence and healththat may require further review and follow-upfailing to produce other documents requested by the College.

Remember:

You may photocopy any of the verification forms as necessaryWhile you can submit yourproof of citizenship, residency status, or authorization to practise nursing in Ontariodocumentation at any time during the online application process, it is recommended you submit this documentation with your application. If you do not submit them during your initial online application, you will need to send them to the College separately.Incomplete or missing information may delay the processing of your application.All applications for registration are confidential. Information about your application will be shared with only you unless you provide written permission to release the information to a third party (i.e., an employer, spouse, agency or lawyer). To release information to a third party, you must send us a written and signed letter of permission or complete theAuthorization to Release Informationform.Making a false or misleading statement or representation on your application or supporting documents may result in the cancellation of your application for registration and/or cancellation of any certificates of registration that may be issued.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration Requirements
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/registration-requirements-for-rns-and-rpns/
Title: Registration Requirements

During the application process, CNO assesses all applicants to determine whether they meet the following registration requirements.

If CNO finds that you do not meet one or more of these requirements, then you may be asked to provide more information or do something (such as complete an evaluation or additional education) that allows you to meet those requirements.

You have the right torequest a review of your applicationif you want to appeal any decision made by CNO staff or the Registration Committee concerning your application.

SeeRegistration Requirementsfor further information about each of these requirements.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Examinations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/examinations/
Title: Examinations

Nurses currently registered to practice in another Canadian jurisdiction who wish to practice in Ontario are not required to write a registration examination to register with the CNO. Please refer to thissection of the registration guidefor more detail.

If you are applying to practice as an RN, you will write theNCLEX-RN.

If you are applying to practice as an RPN, you will write theREx-PN.

Both exams consist of a series of questions designed to measure the competencies of nurses at the start of their practice. The examinations are written at testing centres across Canada.

All applicants, regardless of their registration status, must successfully complete a separate jurisprudence exam. This online exam is designed to evaluate your knowledge and understanding of the laws, regulations  and CNO by-laws, practice standards and guidelines that govern the nursing profession in Ontario.

TheRN/RPN Jurisprudence Examcan be completed at any time, and from any location. Once you have submitted your application form and fees, you will receive information about how to access the secure testing site.

You must provide an email address to the CNO to receive information about your jurisprudence exam. This email address must be unique to you (it cannot be an address that is shared with other applicants to CNO).

Visit ourExaminationssection for more about the registration and jurisprudence exams, including fees, refund policies and special accommodation requests.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration requirements for registered Canadian nurses
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/registration-requirements-for-registered-canadian-nurses/
Title: Registration requirements for registered Canadian nurses

TheOntario Labour Mobility Act(OLMA) supports full labour mobility for Canadian nurses who wish to practice in Ontario, if they can demonstrate they are registered to practice as an RN or LPN in good standing. Good standing means the applicant:

is not the subject of any discipline or fitness to practice order or of any proceeding, ongoing investigation, interim order or agreement as a result of a complaint, investigation or proceeding; andis complying with the continuing competency and quality assurance requirements where they are currently registered to practice in Canada

Applicants must provide, from each Canadian nursing regulatory body with which they hold an equivalent certificate of registration, a certificate or letter confirming that they are in good standing as a nurse. This includes confirmation that the applicant is registered and is permitted to practice nursing in that province or territory. In doing so, CNO recognizes the Education, Exam, and Language Proficiency registration requirements as being met with some exceptions.

Nurses, who are currently registered as an RN or practical nurse elsewhere in Canada, must also meet the following requirements to register in Ontario:

Provide evidence of practice within the past three years based on declared employment unless the applicant completed their nursing program or additional education (e.g. refresher or bridging program) within the past three yearsSuccessfully complete CNO’s Jurisprudence ExaminationProvide proof of citizenshipProvide a Police Criminal Record CheckDeclare any past offenses or findings related to the practice of nursing or another profession, or are involved in certain proceedingsDeclare whether you suffer from any physical or mental condition or disorder that could affect your ability to practice nursing in a safe manner. CNO must also be satisfied that you will practice with decency, honesty and integrity, and in accordance with the law.

By having equivalent Canadian registration, applicants are not required to undergo any material additional training, experience, examinations or assessment in order to register with the CNO.

This applies to all nurses who are registered to practice in a Canadian jurisdiction outside of Ontario, no matter where they received their nursing education.

CNO recognizes that obtaining third party information may be a barrier to timely registration. As such, eligible applicants currently registered in another Canadian jurisdiction will receive options through the applicant portal to expedite the registration process. These include:

Applicants who are not recent graduates, can provide details about their most recent practice by completing a newSupplementary Information formonline, instead of waiting for the Verification of Nursing Practice to be completed and submitted to CNO by employers. CNO may also contact the most recent nursing employer to confirm details about employment and RN or RPN practice.Applicants can choose to sign an Agreement and Undertaking instead of waiting for the Verification of Registration to be completed by their current Canadian regulator(s). Through this Agreement and Undertaking, applicants will:declare that their status as a current practising registrant in another Canadian jurisdiction(s) is in good standing, which includes information about discipline or fitness to practice orders, regulatory proceedings, investigations, complaints, interim orders or agreements, and compliance with continuing competence and quality assurance; andagree to arrange for the required Verification of Registration(s) to be submitted directly to CNO within 30 days of registration.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Initial Registration
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/canada-outside-ontario/initial-registration/
Title: Initial Registration - Canada (Outside Ontario)

Registering with the College is now an online process.

When you have successfully met all registration requirements, you cancomplete your registration online and pay the applicable fee.

Once you have completed your registration, then you can confirm your registered status by going toFind a Nurse, the College’s online register, and searching for your name.

Remember:

If the name on any of your supporting documents is different from the name appearing on your application, then please send a photocopy of your birth certificate, marriage certificate, divorce decree or legal name change along with a letter requesting a name change.If during the application process the College receives any information that could affect your ability to practise nursing, the College will review the information and may extend the time needed to process your application.Your application with the College will remain open as long as there is evidence of progress towards meeting registration requirements. If there has been no activity on your application for two years, then the College will consider the application closed. Once that occurs, you will need to submit a new application along with fees and documentation if you wish to register with the College.Note that criminal record checks are only valid for six months from date of issue, so if a previously submitted criminal record check has expired, you will need to apply for and submit a new one.

If I become eligible for registration near the end of the year and I want to register before the end of the year, will I have to pay two fees – one for this year and one for the next year?

It is your choice whether to register with the College this year or next year. The annual fee expires on December 31 every year and it is not pro-rated. This means that if you choose to become registered to practice for the remainder of this year, then you will need to pay the registration fee for this year and then pay another fee to renew your registration for the next year by December 31 of this year.

If you plan to register next year, all requirements for registration must still be met at the time of your registration. You must register before any requirements expire.The College cannot reverse your registration once it has been issued.If you do plan on practicing nursing this year, you must first register with the College, no matter how short the timeframe.

Do you have any other questions about your examinations or the registration process?Contact the College.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Outside Canada
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/
Title: Outside Canada

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Introduction
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/ontario1/
Title: Introduction

Welcome to the College of Nurses of Ontario’s guide to registration for international applicants.

This guide explains the process for registering in Ontario and the requirements that all nurses must meet to become a member of the College.

It is intended for anyone who wants to become a Registered Nurse (RN) or Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) in Ontario and meets the following conditions:

you are a graduate of a nursing program outside of Canadaandyou are not currently registered as a nurse in the same category in any part of Canada.This means:if you want to become an RN in Ontario, you are not currently registered as an RN in another Canadian jurisdictionif you want to become a RPN in Ontario, you are not currently registered as an RPN, also known as a Licenced Practical Nurse (LPN), in another Canadian jurisdiction.

This guide covers all applicants whose nursing education occurred outside of Canada. This includes Canadian citizens who received their nursing education in another country and are not currently registered as a nurse in Canada.

If you are a graduate of any nursing program in Canada, currently registered to practise as a nurse in Canada or seeking to become a Nurse Practitioner in Ontario, then return toRegistration Guidesand choose the guide that best describes your situation.

We have made every effort to ensure the accuracy of the information in this guide.Contact CNOif you have any questions or discover an error.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Getting Started
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/getting-started-canada/
Title: Getting Started

Know which documents you will need to support your application when you begin.

To start the application process, you will need proof of citizenship. Some documents, such as the police criminal record check, involve a third party to send them. Make sure you plan for these documents to prevent any delays at the end of the application process.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Why Register with the College?
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/practising-as-an-rn-or-rpn-in-ontario/
Title: Why Register with the College?

Becoming a member of the College is a legal requirement for anyone who wishes to practise as a nurse in Ontario.

It is illegal for anyone to practise nursing in Ontario or to call themselves a nurse in Ontario unless they hold a valid certificate of registration with the College.

Only members of the College of Nurses can practise nursing in Ontario and use the titles "nurse," "Registered Nurse (RN)," "Registered Practical Nurse (RPN)," or "Nurse Practitioner (NP)" within the province.

Your status as an Registered Nurse or Registered Practical Nurse assures the public that everyone who identify themselves as nurses in Ontario have gained the knowledge, skill and judgment needed to provide safe and ethical nursing care.





------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Beginning Your Application
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/beginning-the-application-process/
Title: Beginning Your Application

The registration process begins when you open an account with theNational Nursing Assessment Service(NNAS). NNAS is the national body that starts collecting documents and assessing internationally educated nurses applying to become RNs and RPNs in Ontario.

After you open your NNAS account, NNAS will tell you which documents they need to verify your personal information, nursing education, nursing registration and past nursing experience.

These include documents about:

identity (e.g., passport, birth certificate, driver's licence)nursing education (e.g., verification forms, transcripts, course descriptions)nursing registration (e.g., verifications forms from all jurisdictions where you have been registered as a nurse)employment (e.g., verification forms from organizations where you have worked/volunteered within the past 5 years)language proficiency (e.g., test results)

Find specific information about what NNAS requires in theirApplicant Handbook.

NNAS:

receives, reviews and stores all documents that you or others submitensures your file contains documents CNO requires to determine if you meet the registration requirementsensures that your documents are valid and not falsifiedevaluates your education documents against Canadian standardsprepares a report about your nursing education, registration history and practicesends the completed file to CNO

Once NNAS has authenticated and verified the required documents, and conducted its assessment of your nursing education, you will receive instructions for applying to CNO. CNO will not start your application process until we receive:

a request from you to begin the process of applying to register in Ontariothe fee required to begin the registration processa report from NNAS about your nursing education, registration history and work experience

CNO determines if you meet the specific registration requirement based on the documents you submitted to NNAS. If further assessment is needed, CNO may ask you for more information. For example, CNO assesses all nursing education and practice to determine if applicants meet the nursing education requirement. As a result, CNO may ask you to submit more proof of nursing practice (including verification forms and job descriptions) since you graduated, than you provided to NNAS.

Once CNO receives this information, we review your file and inform you if any further information, assessment, education or training is required before you can write thenational registration examination.

The first step in the process is determining whether you meet the nursing education requirement. To do this, it is very important to send all information about your education to NNAS for review.

NNAS will not begin assessing your nursing education until it receives all documentation related to any nursing programs and/or additional nursing education that you have indicated on your NNAS application form.

CNO's initial application fee, payable when you ask CNO to consider your application, is non-refundable. Contact CNO if you have any questions. Contact NNAS directly about its fees and refund policy. For information about exam fees, contact NCSBN.

View all application and registration fees

Completing the registration process can take anywhere from 3 - 18 months,but this is a guideline only. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure the timely delivery of all documentation and other information that NNAS and CNO request.

Factors that may delay an applicant’s registration include:

graduating from a program that doesn’t meet entry-to-practice competenciesfailing toprovide evidence of having practised nursingor graduated from a nursing program within the past three yearsfailing to provide evidence that demonstrateslanguage proficiency in either English or Frenchthe time needed totranslate official documentsinto either English or Frenchfailing to successfully complete the requiredregistration examinationorjurisprudence examinationinformation about yourconduct, competence and healththat may require further review and follow-upfailing to produce other documents in a timely manner

Keep copies of your completed forms for your records. Ensure that all forms are dated and signed.

While you can submit your citizenship documentation at any time during the application process, we recommend you submit your proof of Canadian citizenship with your initial application to NNAS.

Incomplete or missing information, including insufficient fees, may result in a delay in processing your application.

Making a false or misleading statement or representation on your application or supporting documents may result in cancelling your application for registration and/or cancelling any certificates that may be issued.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration Requirements
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/registration-requirements-for-rns-and-rpns/
Title: Registration Requirements

During the application process, the College assesses all applicants to determine whether they meet the following registration requirements.

If the College finds that you do not meet one or more of these requirements, then you may be asked to provide more information or do something (such as complete an evaluation or additional education) that allows you to meet those requirements.

You have the right torequest a review of your applicationif you want to appeal any decision made by College staff or the Registration Committee concerning your application.

SeeRegistration Requirementsfor further information about each of these requirements.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Examinations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/examinations/
Title: Examinations

All applicants to CNO must successfully complete the registration examination that Council approved  for the category they are applying to.

If you are applying to practise as an RN, you will write theNCLEX-RN.

If you are applying to practise as an RPN, you will write theREx-PN.

Both tests consist of a series of questions designed to measure the competencies of nurses at the start of their practice. Both tests must be written at a designated testing facility within Canada.

In addition to the registration exam, you  must successfully complete a separate jurisprudence exam designed to evaluate your knowledge and understanding of the laws, regulations, and College by-laws, practice standards and guidelines that govern the nursing profession in Ontario.

TheRN/RPN Jurisprudence Examis written online and can be completed at any time. Once you have submitted your application form and fees, you will receive information about how to access the secure testing site.

You must provide an email address to the College to receive information about your jurisprudence exam. This email address must be unique to you (i.e., it cannot be a shared address with other applicants to the College).

Visit ourExaminationssection for more about the registration and jurisprudence exams, including fees, refund policies and special accommodation requests.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Initial Registration - Outside Canada
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/initial-registration/
Title: Initial Registration - Outside Canada

Registering with the College is now an online process.

When you have successfully met all registration requirements, you cancomplete your registration online and pay the applicable fee.

Once you have completed your registration, then you can confirm your registered status by going toFind a Nurse, the College’s online register, and searching for your name.

Remember:

If the name on any of your supporting documents is different from the name appearing on your application, then please send a photocopy of your birth certificate, marriage certificate, divorce decree or legal name change along with a letter requesting a name change.If during the application process the College receives any information that could affect your ability to practise nursing, the College will review the information and may extend the time needed to process your application.Your application with the College will remain open as long as there is evidence of progress towards meeting registration requirements. If there has been no activity on your application for two years, then the College will consider the application closed. Once that occurs, you will need to submit a new application along with fees and documentation if you wish to register with the College.Note that criminal record checks are only valid for six months from date of issue, so if a previously submitted criminal record check has expired, you will need to apply for and submit a new one.

If I become eligible for registration near the end of the year and I want to register before the end of the year, will I have to pay two fees – one for this year and one for the next year?

It is your choice whether to register with the College this year or next year. The annual fee expires on December 31 every year and it is not pro-rated. This means that if you choose to become registered to practice for the remainder of this year, then you will need to pay the registration fee for this year and then pay another fee to renew your registration for the next year by December 31 of this year.

If you plan to register next year, all requirements for registration must still be met at the time of your registration.  You must register before any requirements expire.The College cannot reverse your registration once it has been issued.If you do plan on practicing nursing this year, you must first register with the College, no matter how short the timeframe.

Do you have any other questions about your examinations or the registration process?Contact the College.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Timelines for registration processes
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/timelines-for-registration-processes/
Title: Timelines for registration processes

To ensure fairness and equitable treatment of all applicants, every application is assessed individually.

As a result, the time required to complete the assessment process can vary from one applicant to the next.

CNO is committed to processing your application as quickly as possible. To help facilitate this, we ask you to submit information requested by us in a timely way. The longer it takes for you to submit information, the longer the process will take

CNO makes every effort to acknowledge all written correspondence from applicants within 15 days. If the request is one that cannot be addressed within those 15 days, then we will acknowledge receipt of the request and provide information about next steps.



graduation from a nursing or practical nursing program that doesn’t meet entry-to-practice competencieslack of evidence the applicant has practised nursing or graduated from a nursing program within the past three yearslack of evidence the candidate demonstrateslanguage proficiency in either English or Frenchsubmission of official documents in languages other than English or French. For more information, seeTranslation of Documentsunsuccessful completion of the national registration examinformation provided to CNO that would require further assessment to ensure that applicants have the knowledge, skill and judgement to practice nursing safely and competently.failure to provide documents requested by CNO in a timely manner.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration requirements
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/
Title: Registration Requirements

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nursing Education
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/
Title: Nursing Education

You must demonstrate the successful completion of a nursing education program designed to prepare you for the type of nursing (RN, RPN or NP) that you want to practise in Ontario.

Most applicants meet this requirement by completing anursing programapproved by the College’s Council or by a body authorized by Council (e.g., the Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing) to approve nursing programs.

For more information about the process for meeting the nursing education requirement relevant to the type of nurse you are applying to register as in Ontario, click one of the links below.

If you have not completed anapproved nursing program, then the College will assess your nursing education to determine whether it’s equivalent to that of an approved program.

"Equivalent"means you received an education that provided you with the nursing knowledge, skill and judgment at least equivalent to that of a current graduate from an approved nursing program.

Competenciesare the building blocks of nursing practice. They are the behavioural actions that require a nurse to bring their depth of knowledge, skill and judgment to their role, allowing them to safely practise and adapt to changes in a health-care environment.

The College has prepared three documents that list the competencies that all applicants, depending on the type of nurse they're applying to be, must demonstrate before they can practise in Ontario:

RNs:Entry-to-Practice Competencies for Registered NursesRPNs:Entry-to-Practice Competencies for Ontario Registered Practical NursesNPs:Entry-to-Practice Competencies for Nurse Practitioners

Applicants are required to demonstrate the nursing knowledge, skill and judgement by meeting all required competencies as outlined in the competency documents applicable to the type of nurse (RN, RPN or NP) that the applicant wants to register as.

When the College considers your application, it looks atallyour nursing education, from your original nursing program to any additional nursing courses or programs you may have completed. We do this to determine if all your education included the competencies required to meet the nursing education requirement.

If an assessment of your education finds that you demonstrate the required nursing knowledge, skill and judgment, then you are eligible to write theregistration exam.

If an assessment identifies competency gaps, then you may be required to either go through additional assessment or to complete additional education so that you can address those gaps.

In some cases, the College may determine that an applicant’s nursing education is not equivalent to the education provided in an approved program. When this happens, the College helps applicants identify the competency gaps in their nursing education.

The College does this so that applicants can get the additional help they need in order to meet the nursing education requirement and proceed with their registration.

The way in which the College assesses applicants with competency gaps is determined by the type of nurse the applicant is applying to become and whether the applicant has providedevidence of nursing practicewith their application:

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: REQ - RN Education
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/nursing-education-rn/
Title: Nursing Education: RN

You must show evidence of a nursing education for the type of nursing (RN, RPN or NP) that you want to practise in Ontario.

Applicants meet this requirement by completing a nursing program approved by the College.

If you did not complete anapproved nursing program, then we will look at your nursing education and nursing experience, if any, to determine if it meets the entry-to-practice education requirement.

Seewww.cno.org/educationfor more information about this requirement, including how we assess your nursing education and what happens if you are referred for additional evaluation.

RN applicants |RPN applicants|NP applicants

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: REQ - RPN Education
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/nursing-education-rpn/
Title: Nursing Education: RPN

You must show evidence of nursing education for the type of nursing (RN, RPN or NP) that you want to practise in Ontario.

Applicants meet this requirement by completing a nursing program approved by the College.

If you did not complete anapproved nursing program, then we will look at your nursing educationand nursing experience, if any,to determine if it meets the entry-to-practice education requirement.

Seewww.cno.org/educationfor more information about this requirement, including how we assess your nursing education and what happens if you are referred for additional evaluation.

Note: Failure to complete part of the following evaluation or the required additional education may mean that you have not met these requirements and you will be unable to proceed with your application. Applicants can request a review of their application by the Registration Committee at any time during the evaluation.



RN applicants| RPN applicants |NP applicants



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: REQ - NP Education
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/nursing-education-np/
Title: Nursing Education: NP

You must show evidence of nursing education for the type of nursing (RN, RPN or NP) that you want to practise in Ontario.

Most applicants meet this requirement by completing a nursing program approved by the College’s Council.

If you did not complete anapproved nursing program, then we will look at your nursing education to determine if it meets the entry-to-practice education requirement.

Seewww.cno.org/educationfor more information about this requirement, including how we assess your nursing education and what happens if you are referred for additional evaluation.

RN applicants|RPN applicants| NP applicants

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registered Nurses Canadian Competency Assessment Program
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/internationally-educated-nurses-competency-assessment-program/
Title: Registered Nurses Canadian Competency Assessment Program

TheRegistered Nurses Canadian Competency Assessment Program (RNCCAP), formerly theInternationally Educated Nurses Competency Assessment Program(IENCAP), is a standardized evaluation of the knowledge, skill and judgment for internationally educated nurses (IENs) applying to become RNs in Ontario. The RNCCAP continues to be administered by Touchstone Institute.

The RNCCAP is based on theEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Registered Nurseswhich describes the competencies an entry-level RN is expected to possess based on their education and experience.

The RNCCAP uses the format an Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) for the evaluation, which takes place in a setting similar to real-life healthcare situations in Ontario.

If you do not meet theNursing Education requirementafter an assessment of your nursing education and practice (if applicable), you will have the option to complete the RNCCAP.

To qualify for and complete the RNCCAP:

If you meet the Nursing Education requirement, CNO will advise you that you are eligible to write the registration exam (if you have not already passed the NCLEX-RN.)If you do not meet theNursing Education requirement, CNO will advise you to complete additional education to address any remaining competency gaps.

RNCCAP FAQSRegistered Nurses Canadian Competency Assessment Program Registered Nurses Canadian Competency Assessment Program (RNCCAP)Entry to Practice Competencies

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: Registered Nurses Canadian Competency Assessment Program
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/internationally-educated-nurses-competency-assessment-program/faq-rnccap/
Title: FAQs: Registered Nurses Canadian Competency Assessment Program

TheRegistered Nurses Canadian Competency Assessment Program (RNCCAP)is an evaluation that enables you to demonstrate the nursing knowledge, skill and judgment you obtained from your nursing education and experience through an Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE).

The RNCCAP is offered both in-person (Toronto) and virtually, depending on the date. Further information about the RNCCAP format can be found on theTouchstone website.

You must be referred by CNO. If you do not meet the nursingeducation requirementbased on an assessment of your nursing education and any experience, CNO will send your name and email contact information to Touchstone Institute. Touchstone will contact you by email about registering for an upcoming session.

If you are applying to become an RPN or NP, and CNO finds gaps in your nursing education and experience, you will be given the option to complete aCompetency Assessment Supplement.

No.The RNCCAP is available in English only. If you apply to CNO and would like to complete an alternative nursing education equivalency assessment in French, contact CNO in writing. Please note thatthere is a feefor this evaluation option.

You will find the most recent fee information onTouchstone's website. This is separate from otherapplication and registration feesCNO requires.

No. You can complete additional nursing education, instead of the RNCCAP, to meet your competency gaps. Once completed, CNO will review your additional education and determine if you meet the nursing education requirement. However, if you still have competency gaps, you still have the option to complete the RNCCAP.

It is important to be prepared to take the RNCCAP. If you arrive at Touchstone on the day of your assessment, and you feel you are not able to complete any part of the RNCCAP for any reason,do not begin the RNCCAP.Before the test starts, tell a Touchstone examiner that you are not able to participate and contact CNO for further instructions. If you withdraw before starting any part of the evaluation, you will be permitted to reschedule at another date.

If you start the evaluation but are unable to continue, tell a Touchstone examiner. They will document your reasons for withdrawing and send this information to CNO.

You may request a Letter of Participation fromTouchstone Institute.

An Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) is an assessment that allows applicants to demonstrate their nursing knowledge, skill and judgment in a simulated health care setting.

During the OSCE, applicants rotate between stations, interacting with patient-actors who present with different health issues. Please refer to Touchstone’s resources and sample OSCE scenarios.

An OSCE allows applicants to demonstrate their knowledge, skill and judgment in a setting that is as close as possible to real-life nursing experiences they would encounter in Ontario.

The OSCE is based onEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Registered Nurses, which includes all the competencies that a practicing Canadian nurse is expected to possess. Please refer to Touchstone Institute’s website underExam Formatto learn more about the content and blueprint.

It is important to ensure you are ready to take the evaluation. Touchstone Institute hasresourcesavailable to help you prepare for the RNCCAP.

The RNCCAP will assess many areas of your foundational knowledge including the sciences and humanities, as well as your ability to communicate.

Communication is a key part of the OSCE. This includes:

reading charts or notes related to health issuesparticipating in a conversation with a patient or another health professionalcompleting a health assessment to take a historydocumenting care provideddiscussing the specifics of a health scenario

Your ability to complete the evaluation can be affected by challenges in communicating effectively in English. You should be confident that youcan read, write, listen and speak English at a level that allows you to practice nursing safely in Ontario.

To help you prepare, you can also:

reviewEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Registered Nursesreview CNO’spractice standards and guidelinesreview current nursing textbooks about nursing practice in Ontario

Touchstone will provide CNO with your examinee report approximately eight weeks after your RNCCAP. Touchstone assigns one of three achievement levels to each assessment category as follows:Demonstrated,Partially demonstratedandNot Demonstrated.

CNO will determine, based on your performance, whether you have met the Nursing Education requirement or if you have competency gaps.

If you achieve an overall score of3.5 or higher(out of five) on the RNCCAP you will meet the Nursing Education requirement.

If your overall score isless than 3.5, CNO will review your application and provide you with next steps.  You may be advised to complete additional education to meet competency gaps andan updated Competency Assessment Form will be sent to you.

CNO will assess your RNCCAP results along with any additional education and nursing practice as a whole.

You must contact Touchstone Institute if you have any questions about your RNCCAP results.

Resources:

Registered Nurses of Canada Competency Assessment Program(RNCCAP)Exam DetailsRNCCAP Participant GuideEntry-to-Practice Competencies for RNs



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: Education Evaluation for Internationally Educated Nurses
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/education-evaluation/
Title: FAQs: Education Evaluation for Internationally Educated Nurses

Since theNational Nursing Assessment Service (NNAS)was implemented in August 2014, the College has found it provides an objective, fair, practical and efficient first screen of nursing programs.

Based on the NNAS’ evaluation of an applicant’s nursing education, some applicants will become eligible to attempt theregistration exam, while others will require further assessment.

If an evaluation of your education identifies competency gaps, further assessment of your nursing knowledge, skill and judgment, plus any nursing practice, will be required. The new method allows the College to see if your past and current practice satisfies any competency gaps that may have been identified. This change addresses applicants who completed the educational requirement years ago and who may not meet the competencies required of a current graduate of an approved Canadian nursing program, but who have relevant practical experience.

As well, RN applicants will have a chance to complete theInternationally Educated Nurses Competency Assessment Program (IENCAP), and RPN applicants will be able to complete theCompetency Assessment Supplement (CAS), regardless of whether they have practised as a nurse.

The change applies to all applicants who have an open application with the College, as well as all future applicants.

The College is reviewing all current applications to determine the effect of the changes on them. Each applicant will be notified in writing of any change in their status and next steps.

If an assessment of your education finds that you demonstrate the required nursing knowledge, skill and judgment to meet the nursing education requirement, you will be eligible to write theregistration exam.

If an education assessment identifies competency gaps, you may need to complete additional assessment or education.

For more information, go toNursing Education.

The College will assess both.

If the College identifies competency gaps in your education, and you have past and/or current practice experience as a nurse, the College will perform a paper-based review of your nursing practice.

You can provide the College with documentation, such as forms that verify nursing practice, and job descriptions of roles and responsibilities.

The College will assess this information to determine if your nursing practice meets any competency gaps. If gaps are met, you will be eligible to write the registration examination. Otherwise, you must complete an additional evaluation.

If competency gaps are identified in your education, and you don’t have past or current practice as a nurse, you must complete an additional evaluation.

For RN applicants, this evaluation is performed byTouchstone Institute.

RPN applicants use the College’sCompetency Assessment Supplement.

The new evaluation took effect on September 22, 2016, when the College’s Council approved it.

Currently, the College is reviewing all open applications to determine how the changes affect them. The College will notify applicants in writing of any change in status and next steps.

The College has no additional fees for having reviewed your practice. However,Touchstone Institutehas a fee for its evaluation and the College has a fee for theCompetency Assessment Supplement.

For more information go toApplication & Membership Fees.

No. The change applies to all open applications since September 22, 2016, when the College’s Council approved it.

Those whose applications have been refused or closed can reapply. Their education will be assessed through the new process.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: NCLEX-RN as education assessment for IENs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/faqs-nclex-rn-as-educational-requirement-for-iens/
Title: FAQs: NCLEX-RN as education assessment for IENs

In March, Council decided that the approved process for evaluating Internationally Educated Nurse (IEN) applicants for registration as an RN in Ontario be amended to include passing the NCLEX-RN exam.

At that time, they set Jan. 1, 2015 as the cut-off date for passing the NCLEX-RN exam as a way for internationally educated RN applicants to show they have the knowledge, skill and judgment needed to meet the education requirement.

After this decision was made, CNO was prompted by stakeholder feedback and our own ongoing review of our processes to re-consider the January 1, 2015 date. Consequently, Council has approved revising the cut off date for passing the NCLEX-RN exam toApr. 1, 2013as evidence of having the knowledge, skill and judgment to meet the education requirement.

IEN applicants who apply to CNO after completing the NNAS process and who have been identified through the NNAS education assessment as not having nursing knowledge, skill and judgment equivalent to that of a current graduate of an approved baccalaureate degree nursing program will now meet the nursing education requirement, if they successfully completed the NCLEX-RN exam on or afterApr. 1, 2013.

CNO will contact all applicants to whom the new assessment process applies and tell them about their next steps in the application process. Please allow until June 30 to hear from us. You can check for updates in the online applicant portal.

To meet the education requirement, internationally educated RNs are legally required to possess knowledge, skill, judgment reflective of the RN entry-to-practice competencies that areat least equivalent to those of current graduatesfrom approved baccalaureate degree nursing programs. It is important to note that being current is a key component of this legal requirement. This helps to ensure newly registered nurses are prepared to practice safely and competently to meet the present and evolving needs of patients and practice settings.

Although the most current RN entry-to-practice competencies were implemented in 2020, to be fair, Council decided on the cut-off date of April 1, 2013 because the previous competencies (2014) reflect what external assessors, such as NNAS and Touchstone Institute, use to assess the education of applicants. The 2014 competencies are also reflected in theNCLEX-RN test planthat came into effect in April 2013.

We considered previous test plans and reviewed the competencies on which the earlier exam was based. While there were a lot of similarities, there were some fundamental differences that relate to shifts in nursing practice over time.

There were new competencies added in 2014. A few examples are to:

“Promotecurrentevidence-informedpractices”“Utilize a systems approach topatient safetyand participate with others in the prevention of near misses, errors and adverse events”“Incorporate knowledge of thehealth disparities and inequitiesof vulnerable populations, and the contributions of nursing”

While we would have liked to push the date further back, the evidence shows that this would not assess that an applicant’s nursing knowledge, skill and judgment meets the legal requirement of being current when compared to that of current Ontario graduates and would not be in alignment and equitable with our other assessment processes for the Internationally educated applicants.

If you passed the NCLEX-RN after Apr. 1, 2013, we will contact you about required next steps. Please allow until June 30 to hear from us. You can check for updates in the online applicant portal.

If you have not yet applied to CNO, start your assessment process by applying to the NNAS (details can be found atwww.nnas.ca/). Once you have completed that process and have been issued your NNAS Advisory Report, you can then apply to CNO. We will then review your information, including evidence that you passed the NCLEX-RN on or after Apr. 1, 2013, from the nursing regulatory board through which you wrote it.

If you currently have an open application with CNO and a nursing regulatory board has already submitted confirmation that you passed the NCLEX-RNon or after Apr. 1, 2013, Please allow until June 30 to hear from us. You can check for updates in the online applicant portal. If you have not heard from us by then,contact our Customer Service Centre.

If you currently have an open application with CNO but have not arranged for  confirmation that you passed NCLEX-RN to be sent to CNO,please have the nursing regulatory body send a document confirming that you passed the NCLEX-RN on or after Apr. 1, 2013 directly to CNO. If you are registered with the regulatory body, then this would usually be the Verification of Registration document. If you are not registered with them, then this would be a document confirming the date you passed the NCLEX-RN.

CNO will review all affected applications to determine which ones need any additional information. This will take until June 30, and we appreciate your patience. If documents confirming that you passed the NCLEX-RN on or after April 1, 2013 have not been submitted to CNO, please arrange for the nursing regulatory board to submit them directly to CNO.

No, every IEN applicant must start their application process with NNAS.

You can create your applicant profile with CNO, but until we receive the NNAS Advisory Report, we will not be able to start processing your application.

NNAS is the first step in the application process forallinternationally educated RNs.

NNAS validates that you have completed a nursing program that prepared you to practice as the type of nurse for which you are seeking to become registered. NNAS’ education assessment is a key part of the process to understand the gaps in nursing knowledge, skill and judgment for applicants from different jurisdiction.

Since applicants can apply to several jurisdictions in Canada, this process maintains consistency for validating and authenticating documents. Every applicant must submit education documents, identification documents, verification of registration, verification of employment, and evidence of language proficiency to NNAS for authentication and validation.

Once you apply to CNO, we can then determine whether or not you have met the nursing education requirement based on further assessment of the information you provided, including validating whether you passed the NCLEX-RN on or after Apr. 1, 2013. NNAS does not make this determination.

No. Council only approved successful completion of the NCLEX-RN exam on or after Apr. 1, 2013.

No. Successfully completing the NCLEX-RN exam on or after Apr. 1, 2013 will only meet the nursing education requirement.

No. Successfully completing the NCLEX-RN exam on or after Apr. 1, 2013 will only meet the nursing education requirement.

CNO can only allow you to write the NCLEX-RN once you have completed the process that makes you eligible to write a registration exam. The process of becoming eligible starts with you submitting to NNAS your education documents, identification documents, verification of registration, verification of employment, and evidence of language proficiency. NNAS will authenticate and validate these documents, and then send CNO a report.

Based on NNAS’ Advisory Report, we then determine whether or not your nursing education has provided you with equivalent knowledge, skills and judgment to meet the nursing education requirement and become eligible to write the NCLEX-RN.

We will notify you when you are eligible to attempt the exam and can register for the NCLEX-RN.

If not, then you will have to complete further assessment and/or additional education.

Yes. If another nursing regulatory body or Board of Nursing allows you to write the NCLEX-RN and you pass the exam, the regulatory body or board of nursing can send your results directly to CNO.

If you completed your RN program in Canada or are currently registered as an RN in Canada, you can apply directly to CNO. If you are educated outside of Canada and are not currently registered as a practicing RN in Canada, you must first apply to NNAS. This process has not changed.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Completing Additional Education
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/completing-additional-education/
Title: Completing Additional Education



CNO reviewsall relevantinformation provided in your application, including:

your National Nursing Assessment Service Advisory reportany other nursing education you’ve completedinformation about any nursing experience you can provide, which may include the results of any additional evaluations you have been asked to complete.

If CNO finds that you have not met the education requirement, we will ask you to complete additional nursing education to address your learning needs.

If we find gaps in your nursing knowledge, skill and judgment, we will send you a letter outlining the specific competencies that need to be addressed.

Please review a list of acceptedcourses or programsyou can enroll in to address your learning needs and meet the nursing education requirement.

Once you complete your education, you must ask the school to send an official transcript by email toenp@cnomail.orgor by mail (in a sealed envelope, with the school’s official seal or stamp).

When we receive the transcript, it will be reviewed to confirm that the education you completed addresses the identified competencies and provide you with equivalent nursing knowledge, skill and judgment. (We may ask for more information, such as official copies of course descriptions or outlines, to help make our decision.)

If we find your additional education does not address all the competency gaps, you will be asked to complete further education or training.

Note: the level of education required for each nursing category differs; for example, RN applicants are required to complete additional education that is equivalent to the education provided to a current graduate of a Canadian university baccalaureate degree nursing program while RPN applicants are required to complete additional education equivalent to the education provided to a current graduate of an Ontario college practical nursing diploma program.

You also can visit the website of one of the nursingregulatory bodies in another Canadian jurisdictionand select a nursing program from an approved or accredited school in that jurisdiction that may provide the necessary education to address your learning needs at the required level.

Competency-based education (Gap-filler programs/courses) for Internationally Educated ApplicantsFAQs: Competency based education for internationally educated applicants

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Competency-based education for internationally educated applicants
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/competency-based-education-ie-applicants/
Title: Competency-based education for internationally educated applicants

This page lists competency-based gap-filler programs and courses CNO recommends for internationally educated applicants in need of further education to meet their learning needs. These programs and courses offer an efficient path towards meeting CNO’s Education Requirement.

If you require additional education, you should:

Review yourCompetency Assessment Form(CAF) to know what learning needs you have outstandingReview the list of programs/courses below to identify which ones best match your learning needsChoose the appropriate program or course

Your CAF will suggest that you pursue a multi-course program or select individual courses to complete your learning requirements. You do not have to take the courses CNO recommends. However, if you decide to take different courses beyond what CNO recommends, they may not meet the education registration requirement.

Fanshawe College: Bridging Internationally Educated Nurse ProgramConestoga College: Enhanced Practice for Internationally Educated Nurses(For international students applying from overseas only)

George-Brown College: Nursing for Internationally Educated NursesHumber College: Registered Practical Nurse RefresherNiagara College - Gerontology

Fanshawe College: Nursing in OntarioKwantlen Polytechnic University Professional Studies - HealthOntario Colleges: Internationally Educated Nurse (IEN) Upgrade CoursesSt. Francis Xavier University: Continuing and Distance Education – Nursing

The following programs meet all entry-level competencies:

Algonquin College Practical Nursing for Internationally Educated NursesCentennial College Practical Nursing Diploma for Internationally Educated NursesOntario Internationally Educated Nurses Course ConsortiumYork University Post-RN Internationally Educated Nurses BScN Program

To see all CNO approved nursing programs,click here.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: Competency based courses for additional education
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/education/faqs-competency-based-courses/
Title: FAQs: Competency based courses for additional education

CNO reviews all relevant information provided in your application, including:

your National Nursing Assessment Service Advisory Reportother nursing education you have completedinformation about any nursing experience, which may include the results of additional evaluations you have completed

If CNO finds that you require additional learning to meet the education requirement, we will send you a letter and a Competency Assessment Form (CAF) outlining the specific competencies that need to be addressed. We will also send you a link to a list of programs and courses you can take to meet these competencies.

Before applicants can register with CNO, they must show they possess nursing knowledge, skill and judgment equivalent to that of a current graduate from an approved nursing program in Ontario. CNO will recommend additional education in your CAF to address competency gaps that remain after the assessment of your application.

Review our list of acceptedcourses/programsand their associated competencies. If you choose to take a course that is not recommended in your CAF, please be aware that it may not meet the gaps identified.

CNO completes comprehensive reviews of all accepted competency-based courses to ensure applicants can obtain the required knowledge, application and evaluation of the competencies needed to meet the education requirement.

Some education programs you take may also meet nursing evidence required to meet other requirements for registration, such as Language Proficiency and Evidence of Practice. Please seeLanguage ProficiencyandEvidence of Practicefor more information.

The courses CNO recommends are tailored to your specific application to help you complete the learning you need to meet your outstanding competencies. If you are considering different courses beyond what CNO recommends, they may not meet the education registration requirement.

There are many factors that impact the timelines for each applicant.  Some factors may include:

the time it takes for the school to submit the required information (i.e., transcript, course descriptions, and letter validating the education was provided at the required level),the time it takes for you to meet the other registration requirementsthe time it takes for CNO to review documents to make sure you have met the requirements to complete the registration requirement

CNO has a legislated accountability to approve all Ontario based entry level foundational nursing programs. As such, a comprehensive Program Approval Framework was developed. Applicants who successfully complete a CNO approved nursing program can attain a Baccalaureate and Diploma in Nursing.

Since competency-based courses are at the continuing education level, CNO takes a different approach to accepting these courses for additional education.

To ensure courses and programs meet the competencies required to meet the education registration requirement, CNO reviews the full course curriculum of the school offering the program. If the courses provide the opportunity for applicants to show they obtain the knowledge, application and evaluation of each competency addressed in the course, CNO will accept the course as a recommended option.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Evidence of Practice
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/
Title: Evidence of Practice

You must demonstrate, no more than three years before the CNO issues your certificate of registration, that you have experience practicing in the category you are applying to.

RN applicants|RPN applicants|NP Applicants

“Evidence of practice” refers to any information that shows CNO that you have experience practicing as a nurse within the past three years.

The evidencemustbe relevant to the category or class you are applying to join. For example, an applicant applying to become a Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) must provide evidence of practicing as an RPN within three years of the CNO issuing a certificate of registration.

What is Nursing Practice?

Nursing practice is diverse and is not defined by your role, title, practice setting or a procedure or activity you may be performing. Practicing nursing is not the same as being employed as a nurse; if you volunteer as a nurse, you are considered to be practicing nursing. However, CNO doesn’t recognize time spentcaring for a friend or family memberas nursing practice.

TheNursing Act, 1991defines the practice of nursing as:

The promotion of health and the assessment of, the provision of care for and the treatment of health conditions by supportive, preventive, therapeutic, palliative and rehabilitative means in order to attain or maintain optimal function.

Nursing practice includes both clinical and non-clinical roles. You can be practicing nursing while not providing direct patient care. For example, when working in education, administration, policy or research roles. Nursing is not solely defined as a bedside role and direct patient care.

To practice as a nurse in Ontario, you must beregisteredwith CNO. For your work outside of Ontario to be considered nursing practice, you must be registered, if required, with the nursing regulatory body or authority in the jurisdiction where you were or are currently practicing. For example, if you are using nursing practice in the Philippines as your evidence of recent practice, you must either be, or have been, registered with the Professional Regulation Commission in the Philippines at the time.

Many CNO applicants  meet this requirement by completing a CNO-approvednursing programwithin the past three years.

Evidence of practice can also be demonstrated by:

practice experience as an RN, RPN or NP within the past three years (must be relevant to the category or class to which you are applying)

or

completing other nursing education within the past three years. This includes both theoretical- and clinical-based components relevant to the category to which you are applying. For example, completing a Post Basic Bachelor program in your country of origin, with a clinical component or Masters of Science or Ph.D. in nursing with a research component, may meet the requirement.Some applicants may be eligible to participate in a supervised practice experience in Ontario to meet the evidence of practice requirement. Read theSupervised Practice Experience Partnershipfor more details about the program and eligibility requirements

If you do not have evidence of practice within this timeframe, you still have options. You can:

return to, and practice, in a jurisdiction where you are registered

or

have an evaluation that the Registration Committee approves, and successfully complete any additional training, experience, examinations or assessments the committee identifies. CNO will direct you to complete additional education based on how long it has been since you practiced.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: RPN Applicants: Evidence of Practice
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/rpn-applicants-evidence-of-practice/
Title: RPN Applicants: Evidence of Practice

If you are not a recent nursing graduate and CNO asks you to submit averification of nursing practice formthat provides evidence of recent nursing practice information,CNO will assess the information you provide to determine if you meet the evidence of practice requirement.

Your verification of nursing practice must include:

past position(s) in nursing (e.g., staff nurse, researcher, educational instructor)practice setting(s), as applicable (e.g., long-term care, acute care hospital, in-patient unit)patient population(s) (e.g., geriatrics, paediatrics)

If you were previously registered in another jurisdiction, CNO requires aVerification of Registration form. This form includes evidence of registration in the relevant jurisdiction(s)

For RPN applicants, CNO considers if your nursing practice shows you:

used your nursing knowledge, skill and judgmentapplied the standards of practice or guidelines relevant to the jurisdiction in which you practisedaffected, directly or indirectly, the delivery of health care services to patients

Most applicants who don't meet the evidence of practice requirement have the option to complete additional education.

Course content and number of practicum hours depend on the type of registration the applicant is requesting, and the number of years they have been out of nursing practice.

Some applicants may be eligible to participate in a supervised practice experience in Ontario to meet your Evidence of Practice.

Read theSupervised Practice Experience Partnershipfor more details about the program and eligibility requirements.

RPN applicantswho have not practised in 3 – 10 years must complete:

400 hours of clinical/practical/consolidation experience

and

nursing course content related to cultural context, computers, technology, pharmacology, practice standards, health assessment, legal/ethical, gerontology, communication (including mental health strategies), family-centred care, growth development across the life span, chronic illness and hospitalization effects on the family and family dynamics, nursing theory/framework, leadership and anatomy/physiology/pathophysiology.

RPN applicantswho have not practised in more than 10 years must complete:

600 hours of clinical/practical/consolidation experience

and

relevant nursing course content related to cultural context, computers, technology, pharmacology, practice standards, health assessment, legal/ethical, gerontology, communication, family-centred care, growth development across the life span, chronic illness and hospitalization effects on the family and family dynamics,  nursing theory/framework, leadership and anatomy/physiology/pathophysiology.

You may wish to ask the school if they can assess your previous education, experience and knowledge (also known as a Prior Learning Assessment Recognition or PLAR), or if they will give you advanced standing for any courses. If you receive advanced standing, the school must indicate this on CNO’s Verification of Course Completion form and provide a letter explaining why it gave you advanced standing.

If you are applying for registration as both an RN and RPN, you will meet the requirement for both applications by completing the theoretical and clinical practicum, and consolidation hours, that your RN application requires.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: RN Applicants: Evidence of Practice
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/evidence-of-practice-rns-and-rpns/
Title: RN Applicants: Evidence of Practice

If you are not a recent nursing graduate and CNO asks you to provide evidence of recent nursing practice, it must include:

past position(s) in nursing (e.g., staff nurse, researcher, educational instructor)practice setting(s) (e.g., long-term care, acute care hospital, in-patient unit)patient population(s) (e.g., geriatrics, paediatrics)evidence of registration in the relevant jurisdiction(s)job description(s)

CNO will assess all information to determine if you meet the evidence of practice requirement.

For RN applicants, CNO considers if your nursing practice shows that you:

used your nursing knowledge, skill and judgmentapplied the standards of practice or guidelines relevant to the jurisdiction where you practisedaffected, directly or indirectly, the delivery of health care services to clients.

Note:RN applicants who successfully complete complete Touchstone Institute's RNCCAP evaluation will meet the evidence of practice requirement for their RN application. The expiry date is three years from the date the Touchstone evaluation was successfully completed.

Successful completion is a score of 3.5 and higher.



Most applicants who don't meet the evidence of practice requirement have the option of completing additional education.

Course content and the number of practicum hours depend on the type of registration the applicant is requesting, and the number of years they have been out of nursing practice.

Some applicants may be eligible to participate in a supervised practice experience in Ontario to meet your Evidence of Practice.

Read theSupervised Practice Experience Partnershipfor more details about the program and eligibility requirements.

RN applicantswho have not practised in 3 – 10 years must complete:

400 hours of clinical/practical/consolidation experience

and

nursing course content related to cultural context, computers, technology, pharmacology, practice standards, health assessment, legal/ethical, gerontology and communication.

RN applicantswho have not practised in 10 – 15 years must complete:

600 hours of clinical/practical/consolidational experience

and

nursing course content related to cultural context, computers, technology, pharmacology, practice standards, health assessment, legal/ethical, gerontology, mental health, crisis management, family-centred care, nursing research, nursing theory/framework, leadership, advanced communication and community.

RN applicantswho have not practised in more than 15 years must complete:

400 hours of clinical practice

and

300 hours practical/consolidation experience

and

nursing course content related to cultural context, computers, technology, pharmacology, practice standards, health assessment, legal/ethical, gerontology, mental health, crisis management, family-centred care, nursing theory/framework, leadership, advanced communication and community.

You may wish to ask the school if they can assess your previous education, experience and knowledge (also known as a Prior Learning Assessment Recognition or PLAR), or if they will give you advanced standing for any courses. If you receive advanced standing, the school must indicate this on the CNO’s Verification of Course Completion form and provide a letter explaining why it gave you advanced standing.

If you are applying for registration as both an RN and RPN, you will meet the requirement for both applications by completing the theoretical and clinical practicum, and consolidation hours, that your RN application requires.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: NP Applicants: Evidence of Practice
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/evidence-of-practice-np/
Title: NP Applicants: Evidence of Practice

If you are not a recent nursing graduate and CNO asks you to provide evidence of recent nursing practice, it must include:

past position(s) in nursing (e.g., staff nurse, researcher, educational instructor)practice setting(s), as applicable (e.g., long-term care, acute care hospital, in-patient unit)patient population(s) (e.g., geriatrics, paediatrics)evidence of registration in the relevant jurisdiction(s)job description(s)

CNO will assess all information you provide to determine if you meet the evidence of practice requirement.

Nurse Practitioner applicants must meet the same evidence of practice requirement as other applicants, with one exception: they must demonstrate evidence of practice in an advanced practice nursing role.

This can be done by completingoneof the following:

meeting the educational requirement for registration as an NP in the requested specialty (Adult, Paediatrics or Primary Health Care) within the previous 3 years

or

practising in a clinical NP role. This must have included direct interaction with client population(s) for each desired specialty certificate. The applicant must have used advanced nursing knowledge and decision-making skills in health assessment, diagnosis and therapeutics when treating those clients

or

having an evaluation that the Registration Committee approves. You will be required to complete a supervised clinical practicum as an NP within your desired specialty. As well, you must successfully complete any additional training, experience, examinations or assessments the committee identifies.

For NP applicants, CNO considers if your recent nursing practice includes:

clinical practice within your desired specialty

and

a nursing role within that specialty that required you to use advanced knowledge and decision-making skills in assessment, diagnosis and therapeutics, when treating patients.



Applicants who don't meet the evidence of practice requirement have the option to complete additional education.

NP applicants must complete a supervised clinical practice with a client population that is relevant to the desired NP specialty certificate (i.e., adult, paediatrics, and/or primary health care).

The supervised clinical practice must:

be reflective of the NP role in Ontarioinclude a client population relevant to the desired specialty certificateinvolve advanced knowledge and decision-making skills in health assessment, diagnosis and therapeutics when treating clientsapply the NP core competenciesbe supervised by an NP

Once you complete the required education, your educational facility must send a document (e.g., transcript) to CNO confirming you have completed the supervised clinical practice. This should include an assessment of your practice applying the NP core competencies and achieving learning objectives. CNO must receive this information in a sealed envelope bearing the educational facility’s letterhead, seal or stamp.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Evidence of Practice (RN & RPN): Frequently Asked Questions
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/faq-evidence-of-practice-rn-rpn/
Title: Evidence of Practice (RN & RPN): Frequently Asked Questions

You can meet the evidence of practice requirement in the following ways:

working or volunteering as a nurse in a jurisdiction where you are registered, in the same category for which you are applying, within the past 3 yearscompleting your original nursing program or additional nursing education in the same category for which you are applying within the past three years.  The program or education must include both theory and clinical-based components (e.g. Specialty Certificate with a clinical practicum or Masters in Nursing or Ph.D. with a research/publication outcome)achieving the required benchmark scores by completing theInternationally Educated Nurses Competency Assessment Program(IENCAP) with the Touchstone Institute within the past 3 years (this is a score 3.50 or above on the OSCE and 68% or above on the MCQ) –– this requirement is specific to RN applicantscompleting specified additional nursing education directed by CNO in the same category for which you are applying, which addresses required areas of nursing knowledge, skill and judgment, along with specified hours of supervised clinical practicum within the past 3 yearspracticing as an RN or RPN in the Temporary Class, Emergency Class or Special Assignment Class. Employers must submit to CNO the Verification of Nursing Practice form to confirm your practice.

NOTE:Some CNO applicants  may also qualify for theSupervised Practice Experience Partnershipto meet the evidence of practice requirement.

No. You must pass both portions of the IENCAP within the past 3 years to meet the evidence of practice requirement. To pass the IENCAP, you must score 3.50 or above on the OSCE and 68% or above on the MCQ.

No. You can only use IENCAP pass results obtained within the past three years. You must obtain a score of 3.50 or above on the OSCE and 68% or above on the MCQ to pass the IENCAP. Also, practice that took place more than three years ago will not be considered for current evidence of practice.

You can submit information about this additional education for CNO to review as long as you completed the education in the last 3 years, and it had a combination of theory and clinical components.

No. You are required to complete both theory and clinical components of the additional education as directed by CNO.

According to theNursing Actand CNO’s Standards and Guidelines, there are differences between RNs and RPNs in:

the level of autonomous practicethe types of patient acuity and complexity that are managed by RNs and RPNs, anddifferences in their authority to initiate controlled acts.

Thus, while your RPN practice has provided you with valuable nursing experience and makes an important contribution in the delivery of health care service, your RPN practice cannot be recognized as practicing as an RN.

No. All applicants are legally mandated to provide evidence of practice in the past three years. This ensures that CNO protects the public by registering nurses who are current in their nursing knowledge, skill, judgment and practice experience. For this reason, an applicant must meet all other requirements for registration on or before the date on which their evidence of practice expires.

The expiry date is set based on the last date on which an applicant:

completed nursing education, including a practicum, orworked/volunteered as an RN/RPN.

No. CNO cannot account for any delays in assessments that are done through third parties. Therefore, we cannot extend your evidence of practice requirement.

No. CNO has provided you with the option to update your evidence of practice, including either:

completing additional education that includes theory addressing specific areas and specified hours of supervised clinical practicum in Ontario,orreturning to practice where you are allowed to legally practice nursing.

We encourage you to contact Ontario nursing schools in your area to find out about programs that will help you meet this requirement.  This includes community colleges which offer refresher programs through continuing education.

You may also be eligible to participate in a supervised practice experience  in Ontario to meet your Evidence of Practice. Read theSupervised Practice Experience Partnershipfor more details about the program and eligibility requirements.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Supervised Practice Experience Partnership
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/supervised-practice-experience/
Title: Supervised Practice Experience Partnership

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Overview
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/supervised-practice-experience/overview/
Title: Overview

The Supervised Practice Experience Partnership (the program) is a partnership program between the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO), Ontario Health and CNO approved organizations.

The program offers applicants the option to complete a supervised practice experience in Ontario to demonstrate current nursing knowledge, skill and judgement and language proficiency skills. By participating in the program, applicants will have an opportunity to meet the following requirements to enter practice as a nurse:

Evidence of Practice, orEvidence of Practice and Language Proficiency

Learn more about the program requirements and how you can participate.

Information for applicantsInformation for organizations and preceptors

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Information For Applicants
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/supervised-practice-experience/information-for-applicants/
Title: Information for Applicants

The following information is for RN or RPN applicants interested in participating in the Supervised Practice Experience Partnership (the program).

Applicants are eligible if they have met all their registration requirements except for:

Evidence of Practice, orEvidence of Practice and Language Proficiency.

Evidence of practice must have expired no more than 5 years before applying to the program. Check the applicant portal to see what requirements you have outstanding to determine if you are eligible.

SPEP is available to RN or RPN applicants, including nurses returning to practice. CNO will notify eligible applicants through the portal.

If you have received a confirmation email from CNO indicating your eligibility and are interested in completing the program with a hospital, long-term care facility, home health or community care organization,you can express your interest by completing the Supervised Practice Experience – Intake Form provided in the email.

Your eligibility must be confirmed by CNO before you can proceed. Once eligibility is confirmed and you have indicated your interest, Ontario Health will match you with an appropriate organization.

If you are interested in completing the program with a retirement home , you will need to contact the retirement home to express your interest and verify their eligibility to participate in the program. The retirement home must be approved by CNO prior to starting the supervised practice experience.

Applicants must share their confirmation of eligibility with the organization before starting the program.

If you believe you are eligible but have not received a message from CNO, please contactSPE@cnomail.org

Before applying to the program, you may wish to consider reflecting on your learning needs to determine if this program is the right option for you.

For this program, applicants will be matched with CNO approved organizations. Applicants will:

go through an orientation process to become familiar with the organization, the practice setting and what to expect from the supervised practice experience.assess their learning needs, identify learning goals and develop a learning plan for their supervised practice experience.complete a minimum practice experience of 140 hours under the supervision of a qualified preceptor. Practice hours may be extended, depending on your individual learning needs.gain relevant current nursing practice experience under the supervision of an NP, RN or RPN preceptor. RPNs applicants can be supervised by either a RPN, RN or NP preceptor, whereas RN applicants can only be supervised by either a RN or NP preceptor.complete an initial and final self-evaluation related to application ofCNO’s standards and guidelines.receive feedback from preceptors and have opportunities for additional learning. Preceptors will complete evaluations using the same criteria as applicants.

Throughout your participation in the program, you must:

refrain from using the protected title, “RN” or “RPN”. These titles are restricted to CNO registered members.clearly explain to others, including clients, the capacity in which you are practicing. For example, stating,

“I am a CNO applicant, applying to register as a XXXX. I’m completing a supervised practice experience as part of my requirements to enter the nursing profession under the supervision of a qualified supervisor.”

only provide care you are competent to provide.not supervise, monitor, or direct the performance of others, withno exceptionsnot delegatea controlled act.

When you complete the program, your preceptor must complete and submit theSupervised Practice Experience Partnership Completion Formto CNO atSPE@cnomail.org.

CNO will review the documents to ensure you have met the requirements to complete your registration in the General Class. Once approved, you will receive a notification through the applicant portal.

Also read:

Supervised Practice Experience Partnership FAQs



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Information for Organizations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/supervised-practice-experience/information-for-organizations/
Title: Information for Organizations

The following information is for organizations interested in participating in the Supervised Practice Experience Partnership.

The Supervised Practice Experience Partnership (the program) is an option for eligible CNO applicants to meet the following requirements to qualify for registration to practice as a nurse in Ontario:

Evidence of Practice, orEvidence of Practice and Language Proficiency

Approved organizations and practice experiences must be based in Ontario. Approved organizations in acute care, long-term care facilities, home health care and community care organizations will be matched with eligible applicants though Ontario Health. Ontario Health will not be matching eligible applicants with approved retirement homes. CNO approved retirement homes are responsible for matching themselves with eligible applicants.

As participating partners, organizations must agree to:

orient the applicant to the practice settingprovide a nurse preceptor to supervise and guide the applicant, and provide feedback and learning opportunitiesoffer a supervised practice experience for a minimum of 140 hours where applicants can apply nursing knowledge, skill and judgement and demonstrate an understanding their nursing accountabilities (CNO practice standards)evaluate applicants using CNO approved toolconfirm applicants have met program requirements at the end of their experience

Organizations must uphold the program requirements and expectations.

Organizations will:

confirm applicant eligibility to participate by verifying the applicant’s eligibility message from the applicant portal.assign an appropriate preceptor(s) and arrange for practice experienceorient the applicant on relevant policies, procedures, resource materials as well as the general practice environmentassess the applicant usingCNO’s Assessment form. (SeeSupervised Practice Experience Partnership: Assessment Overview)contact CNO regarding concerns or clarifications when neededcomplete documentation according to the outcome of the program

The focus of this program is for applicants to gain nursing practice experience. Organization may choose to retain applicants as employees once they become registered with CNO.

Organizations have the right to end the program agreement at any time (e.g., because of lack of progress or for other reasons). In these situations, organizations are requested to please complete and submit theSupervised Practice Experience Partnership Completion Formindicating the reason for failure to complete.

The role of the nurse preceptor is pivotal to the program. The preceptor acts as a resource, role model, mentor/coach, and supervisor. Supervision may be direct or indirect based on the needs of the applicant. Indirect supervision means the preceptor is readily available for consultation but is not directly at the applicant’s side.

RPN applicants can be supervised by either a qualified RPN, RN or NP preceptor, whereas RN applicants can only be supervised by a qualified RN or NP supervisor.

Nurse preceptors must hold a current RPN, RN and/or NP Certificate of Registration in the General Class or Extended Class with CNO. Preceptors must also disclose to the organization any pre-existing relationship (e.g., family, social/personal, business) with the applicant that might interfere with their ability to objectively evaluate the applicant.

Upon completion of the program, the organization must complete and submit theSupervised Practice Experience Partnership Completion Formto CNO atSPE@cnomail.org.

We have created anemployer checklistto outline the organizations responsibilities.

Organizations and preceptors who have questions or need more information about the Supervised Practice Experience Partnership should contact CNO atSPE@cnomail.org.

Organizations interested in participating in the program can complete and submit theSupervised Practice Experience Partnership formtoSPE@cnomail.org. CNO will review your information and contact you directly with next steps.

If you have questions about the program, please contact us atSPE@cnomail.org.

CNO will notify Ontario Health of your approval. Ontario Health is accountable for matching eligible applicants with approved organizations.

Also read:

Information for Applicants



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Frequently Asked Questions
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/evidence-of-practice/supervised-practice-experience/faqs/
Title: FAQs



You must participate in the SPEP program for a minimum of 140 hours. This time may be extended, by the nurse preceptor, based on your learning needs, previous experience, knowledge and skill level.

The program can be paid or unpaid. Once a match is determined, the applicant and employer will discuss whether compensation is provided as part of the hiring process.

No, CNO does not assess or approve the learning needs you identify for your practice experience. Applicants are responsible for reflecting and determining their own unique learning needs based on a variety of factors, such as experience, education, practice setting, time in or away from the role, etc.

Applicants are eligible if they meet all the registration requirements except for:

Evidence of Practice, orEvidence of Practice and Language Proficiency

Read theinformation for applicantsweb page to learn more about program eligibility and details.

Individuals with expired evidence of practice may still be eligible to participate if the expiry date is no more than 5 years before applying to the program. If your evidence of practice expired more than 5 years ago, you are not eligible.

CNO will notify applicants whose Evidence of Practice expired over 5 years ago about steps they need to take to move forward in the application process.

Check the Applicant Portal to see what requirements you have outstanding to determine if you are eligible.

CNO is reviewing eligibility on a continual basis. Eligible applicants will be notified on the portal.  Please check your registration status on the Applicant Portal.  If you’re still uncertain about your eligibility, contact us atSPE@cnomail.org.

All applicants, including internationally educated nurses, who meet the eligibility requirements can apply to the program.

No. You must have an open application with the CNO and meet the eligibility criteria before you are able to participate in the SPEP program.

Yes, the SPEP placement needs to be completed in an Ontario practice setting.  This is to ensure applicants have the knowledge, skill and judgement to practice according to Ontario laws and CNO’s standards.

There are many factors that impact these timelines for each individual applicant. Some of these factors may include

The time it takes to match you with an approved organizationThe agreed number of hours you will work per week with the approved organization. A minimum practice of 140 hours is required.The time it takes for the organization to complete and submit the program completion formThe time it takes for CNO to review documents to ensure you have met the requirements to complete your registration in the general class

Yes. If you complete an SPEP relevant to practicing as an RN, then you will meet Evidence of Practice for both.

No. If you only received a SPEP eligibility message with your RPN application number, you must complete the supervised practice experience at the level of an RPN.

If you complete SPEP relevant to practicing as an RN, then you will meet Evidence of Practice for both.

No, the decision of an organization to participate in SPEP is voluntary. CNO does not mandate or require organizations to participate. If your organization is interested in participating in this program, please complete theSupervised Practice Experience Partnership Formand submit it to SPE@cnomail.org. CNO will review your information and will contact you directly with the next steps.

The organization is accountable to complete theSupervised Practice Experience Partnership Completion Form.This form confirms the applicant has met the requirements of the SPEP program. It is the CNO’s responsibility to determine whether the applicant has met the requirements to register in the General Class.

Organizations can provide resources similar to what is given to new staff members during orientation, but this also depends on the needs of the individual applicant.

Applicants can complete their SPEP placement in a variety of practice settings. Therefore, the organization is in the best position to identify the appropriate resources to support the applicant.

If you are looking for resources to help applicants understand CNO standards and how to apply them to their practice, you may refer to CNO’sStandards & Learning page.

No, organizations are in the best position to identify appropriate preceptors to guide and support applicants during the supervised practice experience.

No, it is up to the organization to assess and determine the appropriate applicant-to-preceptor ratios to ensure patient safety. This will be determined through considering the needs of the applicant and organizational resources.  For the purposes of this program, the CNO requires a preceptor as the organization’s point of contact.

It’s up to the organization to determine practice experience work hours with their assigned applicants. CNO requires applicants to complete a minimum of 140 hours of practice experience. This may be more depending on the applicant’s learning needs. It doesn’t matter if the practice experience is completed by working full-time or part-time hours.

If you have a concern about an applicant, you can identify this in the SPEP Completion Form or send us an email at spe@cnomail.org. Once we receive this information, we will email you a SPEP Reporting Form to provide further details of your concerns for the CNO’s review. You will also be required to submit a copy of theSPEP Assessment Form for Preceptorsor your organization’s equivalent assessment document(s) along with the reporting form.  You can read more about what and when to report your concerns to CNO from ourReporting Guide(for reference only).

The SPEP placement is not intended to be a competency assessment. Applicants will have already demonstrated competence at the entry-to-practice level by meeting both the Education requirement and successfully passing their registration exam.

The purpose of the SPEP placement is for applicants to obtain their Evidence of Practice requirement. CNO identifies 140 hours as the minimum requirement for applicants to demonstrate application of practice standards and to allow for the varying individual learning needs of an Ontario, Canadian or IEN applicant. An organization can extend these hours to accommodate individual learning or organization needs.

Once applicants complete the program and are fully registered with the CNO, the new nurse (RN or RPN) is fully accountable to the CNO. This accountability includes engaging in quality assurance activities and continuing to identify learning needs. As with any nurse entering practice, they will continue to require support and can work with the employer organization to identify opportunities to address practice competency needs.

Yes, applicants fulfilling the requirements to become a member of a health profession have access to controlled acts  have access to controlled actsunder the supervision or direction of a member of the profession. However, these applicants are prohibited fromdelegatingcontrolled acts.

This new initiative safely integrates applicants into the workforce increasing health human resources. Working in partnership with approved organizations helps applicants to obtain the requirements needed to register as a practicing nurse, and organizations gain competent, qualified practicing nurses.

We acknowledge this is a challenging time for nurses.  The program is a voluntary opportunity for organizations that are able to meet the requirements.  To protect public safety, these applicants require the support of an assigned preceptor to guide their practice experience.  The organization is in the best position to determine if they have the capacity and nursing resources to provide preceptorship before volunteering as a program partner.

The SPEP program is open toany applicantwho meets eligibility criteria. CNO reviews all applicant documents based on the date of receipt and will update applicants of their status and next steps through the Applicant Portal.

CNO is responsible for monitoring, evaluating and approving entry-level nursing educational programs in Ontario to ensure graduates are prepared to practice nursing safely.  We do not have oversight of educational funding for bridging programs or increased access to them.

The Supervised Practice Experience (SPE) option and the SPEP program are different from one another.

SPE is a self-directed option designed by CNO foreligibleregistrants in the Non-Practising Class who have been away from practice three to eight years.

SPEP offerseligibleapplicants (regardless of application type) the option to complete a supervised practice placement in Ontario, giving them the opportunity to meet the evidence of practice or evidence of practice and language proficiency requirements to practice safely in today’s health system.

The table below shows the different requirements between SPEP and SPE.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration Examination
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/registration-examination/
Title: Registration Examination

If you plan to register as a nurse in Ontario, you must first pass a registration exam approved by CNO's Council for the nursing category for which you are applying (RN, RPN or NP).

RN applicants:You must first pass theNCLEX-RN.

RPN applicants:You must first pass theREx-PN (if writing in 2022 and onward).

NP applicants:You must first pass an approved exam for your specialty.

Some applicants may already have written an exam that meets this requirement. SeeExaminationsfor a list of exams the CNO accepts for RN, RPN and NP applicants. You must report to CNO for its review all attempts on any CNO-approved exam.

Exam accommodation is available to those who qualify. SeeRequesting Accommodationfor details.



Repeat Attempts

The number of attempts you are allowed to make on your registration exam depends on which exam you are writing.

If you are writing an exam with a limited number of attemptsandyou haven’t passed the exam after the maximum number of allowed attempts, then your application to the College will be reviewed by theRegistration Committee.(SeeOptions when failing the CPNRE: Frequently asked questionsfor the latest information on the option to write the REx-PN).It will consider any extenuating circumstances (such as a medical or family emergency) that might give CNO reason to annul the results of one or more of your attempts.

ReviewRegistration Exam: Repeat Attemptsfor more information.

See theindividual exam information pagesfor more information about each exam.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration Examination: Repeat attempts
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/registration-examination/registration-examination-repeat-attempts/
Title: Registration Examination: Repeat attempts

The number of attempts you are allowed to make on your registration exam depends on which exam you are writing. Refer tothe page for the specific registration exam you are writingto learn how many times you are permitted to write that exam.

If you are writing an exam with a limited number of attemptsandyou haven’t passed the exam after three attempts, then theRegistration Committeewill review your application to CNO.The committee will consider if there are any extenuating circumstances that might give CNO reason to annul the results of one or more of your unsuccessful attempts

Here are examples of extenuating circumstances the committee might consider:

a medical situation that was unforeseen and may have interfered with your ability to write your examthe death of a loved one that happened shortly before your scheduled exam date.

CNO will notify you if the committee is reviewing your application to allow you the time you need to submit evidence to support your request for an annulment.

Here are examples of the kind of information the committee might consider for review:

apersonal statementfrom you outlining what extenuating circumstances (if any) may have affected your ability to pass the examinationsupporting evidencerelating to the specific extenuating circumstances, such as information from a health care provider about a medical condition (description, date of diagnosis, impact on the applicant, other information), a death certificate in the case of a death in the family, or other relevant information.

You will be allowed another chance to write the exam if the committee decides to annul one or more of your examination results.

If you do not disclose all previous attempts to write a registration examination, CNO may cancel your application for registration and/or cancel any certificates issued by CNO.When counting up your attempts at a registration exam, CNO looks atallyour previous attempts to write that particular exam, whether you wrote the exam in Ontario or in another jurisdiction.

Each time you start to write your registration exam, the attempt is considered one write of the exam, regardless of how much of the exam you completed or how long you sat down to write it.

If you arrive at the testing centre on the day of the test and you feel you are not able to write the exam for any reason,do not sit down to begin. Instead, tell the invigilator of that exam that you are not able to write that day andcontact CNOfor further instructions.

However, if after starting the exam you feel you can’t continue writing it for any reason, inform the exam’s invigilator andthen contact CNOfor further instructions. While this attempt will count as one exam write, the following may apply:

you may have further attempts on the exam available to you if you have not reached the limit of the number of allowed writes(both the REx-PN and NCLEX-RN have no limits); or,if you’re writing an exam limited to three attempts and you are unsuccessful on all attempts, CNO’s Registration Committee can review the circumstances of your decision to not complete the exam to decide if you there were extenuating circumstances. If so, the Committee will annul the previous attempt and allow you another chance to write the exam.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Jurisprudence Examination
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/jurisprudence-examination/
Title: Jurisprudence Examination

You must successfully complete either theRN/RPN Jurisprudence Examinationor theNP Jurisprudence Examination.

These exams test your knowledge and understanding of the laws, regulations, College by-laws, and practice standards and guidelines that govern the nursing profession in Ontario.

The jurisprudence exam is an open-book online exam you can write at any time during your application. You can take the exam as many times as you need.

Seeour section on the jurisprudence examfor sample questions, study resources, information on requesting exam accommodation and more.

Exam accommodation is available to those who qualify. SeeRequesting Accommodationfor details.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Proficiency in English or French
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/language-proficiency/
Title: Proficiency in English or French

You must be able to show proficiency in either English or French to practice nursing in Ontario. This is to ensure you have the appropriate level of language skills needed to practice as a nurse.

CNO defines “Language proficiency” as the ability to communicate and comprehend effectively, both orally and in writing, in either English or French.

To meet this requirement for registration, CNO reviews your evidence to determine if you can read, write, listen and speak, in either English or French, at a level that allows you to practice nursing safely and competently. See thetypes of evidenceCNO considers for this requirement, including accepted language proficiency tests.

You can meet the language proficiency requirement through several options, in any category described below:



Image description

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Types of Evidence
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/language-proficiency/in-depth-language-proficiency/
Title: Types of Evidence

You can demonstrate language proficiency through education, registration status,language proficiency testingor experience.

You only need to submit one form of evidence to demonstrate you have the level of proficiency to practice nursing safely and competently. For example, if you choose to submit practice experience as a nurse in an English or French setting to demonstrate your proficiency, then you do not need to submit other types of evidence.

CNO Policy: Assessing Proficiency in English or French

Applicants whose evidence of language proficiency expires before they register with CNO will be granted a one-year extension.  This one-time extension is part of CNO’s commitment to ensuring that you experience application assessment processes that are informed, fair, inclusive and effective. You do not need to contact CNO to request an extension.

Please note that applicants who received a special extension during the COVID-19 pandemic in April 2021, will not qualify for another one-year extension.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Accepted Language Proficiency Tests
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/language-proficiency/accepted-language-proficiency-tests/
Title: Accepted Language Proficiency Tests

Applicants can meet the language proficiency requirement by achieving the minimum scores foroneof the following tests:

Canadian English Language Benchmark Assessment for Nurses(CELBAN)International English Language Testing System (IELTS): General and academic training versionsTest d’évaluation de français(TEF)Test de connaissance du français pour le Canada (TCF)

Applicants must achieve the test scores for all test components duringonecomplete attempt of the test. If necessary, applicants can re-take tests, in full, to demonstrate language proficiency.

Visit the examination websites to learn more about testing locations and times, fees and re-takes.

NOTE:CNO accepts Language Proficiency tests approved under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) when CNO-approved benchmarks are set. Please note that if the applicant writes an approved test through their immigration process they must meet CNO's minimum benchmark for this test to be accepted as a registration requirement. We will update this page when additional tests are benchmarked and approved by the CNO. Please check back often.

These are the minimum benchmark scores that must be achieved; theyinclude the standard error of measurement.CNO accepts scores from a CELBAN test at CELBAN administration sites, as well as virtually, written at any time within two years of registering. CNO doesnotaccept results from CELBAN tests that educational institutions have administeredfor educational purposes.

Website:Canadian English Language Benchmarks Assessment for Nurses

These are the minimum benchmark scores that must be achieved; they include the standard error of measurement of 0.5.

CNO accepts scores from both the General and Academic format of the IELTS test as follows:

Results from the IELTS General will only be accepted when written within two years prior to applying for registration. CNO will not accept results from IELTS General if you write it any other time.Results from the IELTS Academic test will be accepted when written any time within two years of registering.

Website:International English Language Testing System

These scores are the minimum benchmark scores that must be achieved.

CNO accepts TEF Canada test results if the test is written either two years prior to the date of applying,orwithin two years of the date of registering.

Website:Test d’évaluation de français

These scores are the minimum benchmark scores that must be achieved.

CNO only accepts TCF test results written within two years prior to applying for registration.

Website:Test de connaissance du français pour le Canada (TCF)

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Authorization to Work
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/citizenship/
Title: Authorization to Work

The information on this page is about what you need to do to meet your authorization to work requirement, which includes proof of Citizenship. Permanent Residency or Authorization to Practice nursing.

You must provide proof of your citizenship, residency status, or authorization to practise nursing in Ontario before you can register as a nurse in Ontario.

You do this by including a copy (not originals) ofoneof the following with your application:

Canadian birth certificate issued by a provincial or territorial government, includes either the long or short form/cardStatement of Live Birth, including the emblem at the top, the seal and the registrar's signature at the bottomPages 2 and 3 of your valid* Canadian passport, which includes the name of the document, your picture, full name, passport number, nationality, date of birth, and issuance and expiry datesFront and back of your valid* certificate of citizenshipFront of your valid* permanent resident card showing your picture, which includes the name of the document, your full name, identification number, date of birth, expiry date and picture. Note: if your full name does not appear on the front of the card, you must also provide a copy of the back side of the card or a copy of another Canadian immigration document that shows your full namevalid* landed immigrant papers or confirmation of permanent residencea valid* work/study permit that authorizes you to practice nursing in Ontario. This includes a work permit or a study permit that allows you to work without restrictions anywhere in Canada. If your permit does not allow you to work in health services or limits you to a specific type of employment such as live in caregiver or to working in a specific place outside Ontario (i.e. Alberta), this is not a document that would permit you to practice nursing in Ontario.both sides of your certificate of Indian status or Metis citizenship document

*A document is valid if it has not yet expired at the time it was sent to CNO.

NOTE: If the name on the document you submit to CNO is different from the name on your CNO application, please submit a copy of a legal document (such as a marriage certificate or divorce decree) that validates your name change.

If you can't provide a copy of any of these documents, then choose from one of two options:

CNO will send you the Authorization to Practice - Consent and Waiver form, which you must complete, sign and submit to CNO.  You will agree to:

a. be issued a certificate of registration in the General Class as an RN/RPN/NP subject to conditions          outlined in the form; and

b. waive your right of review and/or appeal by CNO’s Registration Committee or the Health                Professions Appeal and Review Board.

Once CNO receives the signed Consent and Waiver form, you will become eligible for registration if you continue to meet all other requirements for registration.  You will be notified about how to proceed with your registration and pay your fees.

Once registered, information about your registration status will be posted on Find A Nurse, including the condition that you are not entitled to practise nursing in Ontario until you have provided proof of immigration authorization to practise nursing in Ontario.

Once you obtain and submit copies of your proof of authorization to practise nursing in Ontario to CNO, the conditions will be removed from your certificate of registration.  Find A Nurse will be updated to show that you are entitled to practise nursing.  This means that you can begin to work or volunteer as a nurse in Ontario.





------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Past Offences and Findings / Health and Conduct
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/past-offences-and-findings--health-and-conduct/
Title: Past Offences and Findings / Health and Conduct

Past Offences and Findings|Health and Conduct

You must:

truthfully answer questions about any past or current offences, any investigations, inquiries or proceedings, misconduct, incompetence or fitness to practice, any findings made against you relating to the practice of nursing or any other profession, or past registration refusals.also tell the CNO if you suffer from any physical or mental condition or disorder that could affect your ability to practise nursing in a safe manner.

We will also need you to affirm:

you will practise nursing with decency, honesty and integrity, and in accordance with the lawyou have sufficient knowledge, skill and judgment to competently engage in the type of nursing authorized by your certificate of registrationyou will display an appropriately professional attitude

You do all this by answering the questions on theDeclaration of Registration Requirements,included with your application. In addition to your original declaration, you must tell us if your answers to any of the questions change during the application process.

See our information aboutpast offences and findingsandhealth and conduct issuesfor more about what happens when you answer “yes” to a question on the declaration, or the College receives information about your conduct or health from another source.

“I answered yes to a question on my declaration. What happens next?”

If you answer yes to a question on the declaration form, CNO will contact you directly to let you know what specific documents and information we will need to help us in our review of your application. You are responsible for ensuring that all supporting documents from third-party sources are sent directly to CNO. Third-party information submitted by applicants willnotbe accepted.

See our sections onpast offences and findingsandhealth and conduct issuesfor more information about each of the questions on the declaration form.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Health and Conduct
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/past-offences-and-findings--health-and-conduct/health-and-conduct/
Title: Health and Conduct

You must declare whether you suffer from any physical or mental condition or disorder that could affect your ability to practise nursing in a safe manner.

In addition, the College must have reasonable grounds to believe you will:

practise nursing with decency, honesty and integrity and in accordance with the lawhave sufficient knowledge, skill and judgment to competently engage in the practice of nursing authorized by your certificate of registrationdisplay an appropriately professional attitude.

To determine if you meet these requirements, the College will review all relevant information, including:

your responses on the Declaration of Registration Requirements form and any additional information you providehistorical information the College may have about you (e.g., if you are a former member of the College or a current member applying for a different certificate of registration)any other information received by the College

The College keeps all information confidential except as required or allowed by law. Where required, supporting documents must be sent to the College by the proper authorities.Supporting documents that do not come directly to the College from the proper authorities willnotbe accepted.

The following offers information about the health and conduct questions on the declaration form, including the documents you may be asked to provide for each question that you answer with “yes.”



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: In Depth: Health and Conduct
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/past-offences-and-findings--health-and-conduct/health-and-conduct/in-depth-health-and-conduct/
Title: In Depth: Health and Conduct

You must declare whether you suffer from any physical or mental condition or disorder that could affect your ability to practise nursing in a safe manner.

In addition, the College must have reasonable grounds to believe you will:

practise nursing with decency, honesty and integrity and in accordance with the lawhave sufficient knowledge, skill and judgment to competently engage in the practice of nursing authorized by your certificate of registrationdisplay an appropriately professional attitude.

To determine if you meet these requirements, the College will review all relevant information, including:

your responses on the Declaration of Registration Requirements form and any additional information you providehistorical information the College may have about you (e.g., if you are a former member of the College or a current member applying for a different certificate of registration)any other information received by the College

The College keeps all information confidential except as required or allowed by law. Where required, supporting documents must be sent to the College by the proper authorities.Supporting documents that do not come directly to the College from the proper authorities willnotbe accepted.

The following offers information about the health and conduct questions on the declaration form, including the documents you may be asked to provide for each question that you answer with “yes.”

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Accommodation: Case Studies
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/past-offences-and-findings--health-and-conduct/health-and-conduct/accommodation-case-studies/
Title: Accommodation: Case Studies

When applying to be registered with the College, you must declare whether you have any physical or mental condition or disorder that could affect your ability to practise nursing in a safe manner.

The College assesses any information about conditions or disorders that could impact your ability to practice nursing safely, to ensure public protection.

During the process of assessing your ability to practise safely, the College will review all relevant information about your physical or mental condition or disorder. For more information, read ourHealth and Conductpage.

The College will then use the assessed information to determine if you require any reasonable accommodation in order to be registered to practise nursing.

You may also request Accommodation for your registration examinations. For more information, readRequesting Accommodation for an examination.

Accommodationis the word used to describe the duties of an employer, service provider or landlord to give equal access to people who are protected by Ontario’s Human Rights Code.

For writing examinations, accommodation can refer to any adjustment made to the testing conditions that helps an applicant overcome the impact of a physical or mental condition/disorder on their ability to write the exam.

Accommodation provided in the workplace could include the use of voice to text software for documentation, access to an amplified stethoscope, or requirement to work a fixed schedule (no shift work).

Any accommodation granted must not compromise client safety and well-being.

To help you understand how the College deals with different types of requests for accommodation, we have created the following five case studies.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Past Offences and Findings
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/past-offences-and-findings--health-and-conduct/past-offences-and-findings/
Title: Past Offences and Findings

When applying to CNO for a certificate of registration,you must truthfully state if you have ever been found guilty of an offence, refused registration, had a finding related to the practice of nursing or another profession against you, or are involved in certain proceedings.

You do this by completing theDeclaration of Registration Requirementsform included in your application, and by providing additional information to CNO for review if you answer “yes” to any question on the form.

As part of the registration process, CNO requires all applicants to provide a recentpolice criminal record check. This requirement  provides CNO with information to determine if further information is required to assess suitability for registration. For more information, including how and when to submit the criminal record check, readFAQs: Criminal Record Checks

The following provides information about the questions on theDeclaration of Registration Requirementsform. If you answer “yes” to any of these findings, CNO will contact you directly to request additional information and next steps.

CNO Policy: Police Criminal Record Checks for Applicants

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Police Criminal Record Check
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/registration-requirements/past-offences-and-findings--health-and-conduct/past-offences-and-findings/police-criminal-record-check/
Title: Police Criminal Record Check

As part of the registration process, CNO requires all applicants for registration or reinstatement to provide a recent Canadian police criminal record check. This requirement is intended to protect the public from individuals who are not able to practice safe and ethical nursing.

Applicants submitting Canadian police criminal records must do so online through Sterling Talent Solutions'myBackCheck app. If you reside outside of Canada, we will accept a paper copy of a Criminal Record Check from the jurisdiction in which you currently reside.

What type of police criminal record check do I need?

Canadian residents must apply online using Sterling Talent Solutions’myBackCheck appto obtain your criminal record check. You will need to use your CNO application number to log in to the app to register and begin your check. Note: Only applicants who have applied to become a nurse in Ontario will have an application number. If you do not have an application number, read theseFAQs on how to apply to CNO online.

International residents can obtain and submit a police criminal record check from their local jurisdiction.

If you applied for reinstatement: and reside in Canada, you must also usemyBackCheck. You can find your application number by logging on toMaintain Your Membership. For more information about reinstatement, readReinstatement Requirements.

For Canadian's, it will take 2 to 3 days to obtain the police criminal record check using the online. To make sure your application isn't delayed, it is still important that you don't wait until the end of your application to the CNO to request your criminal record check.

Also, you should note that a criminal record check is valid only for six months after it is issued. It is recommended that you obtain your criminal record check closer to the end of your registration process.

No. Current members of the General, Extended, Temporary, or Non-practising class are not required to provide a criminal record check to CNO when applying for registration in another class or category, or when reinstating their registration. Please note, if concerns arise, CNO has the right to ask you to provide a Canadian police criminal record check if any character or conduct issues are identified.

Yes. A check is required if you are seeking reinstatement and have not been registered with CNO in the current or prior year in which you are applying. This also applies if you are a former member of CNO currently residing outside of Canada.

If you never lived in Canada, CNO requires a police criminal record check from the country where you currently reside.

You will also need to provide CNO with a Canadian police criminal record check if you have ever visited Canada or resided in Canada for any length of time.

For CNO's purposes, a check is valid for six months from the date it is issued. If you have a check and it expires before you meet all other registration requirements, then you will have to submit an updated check to complete your registration.

No. Applicants are not required to provide a check before writing their registration or jurisprudence exams.

No. If you have more than one application open with CNO, you are only required to do a police check for one of your applications. Once we receive the result of your police check, we will update it for all your open applications. When submitting your police check throughmyBackCheck, please enter only one application number in the field titled: Application Number. Submitting an incorrect number or both your application numbers will delay the process.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Examinations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/
Title: Examinations

On April 1, 2023, the Next Generation NCLEX (NGN) exam was launched. The NGN tests the competency of nursing applicants and is a registration requirement.

The exam measures critical thinking and the outcome of decision making using theclinical judgment measurement model.

Beginning in 2022, theRegulatory Exam – Practical Nurse (REx-PN™)  replaced the CPNRE as the regulatory exam for RPN applicants to the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO).

If you meet the exam eligibility requirements, CNO will contact you with instructions about scheduling your exam with the exam provider, Pearson VUE.

ReadRegister ed Practical Nurse Registration Examinationsfor more information.

For more information, visit theYardstickwebsite.

The NP-Adult exam test centres are open. Please visit theAmerican Academy of Nurse Practitioner Certification BoardandPSIwebsites for the latest news about the availability of test centres.

For more information about the NP-Paediatrics exam, visit thePediatric Nursing Certification BoardandPrometricwebsites.

ReadNP-Primary Health Care (Ontario)for exam dates.

This exam is written online and can be done remotely.

Starting Monday, July 17th, 2023, those applying for registration in the General or Extended class will have to pass anew jurisprudence exam.

Registration examinations assess whether applicants have the nursing knowledge, skills and judgment required to practice safely at the beginning of their careers in Ontario.

The exam an applicant writes depends on the class of nursing they are applying to:

Registered Nurse (RN) registration examinationIf you are applying to become a Registered Nurse in the General Class, you will write theNext Generation NCLEX (NGN) exam.

Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) registration examinationsIf you are applying to become a Registered Practical Nurse in the General Class, you will write theRegulatory Exam – Practical Nurse (REx-PN™).Nurse Practitioner NP examinationsIf you are applying to the Extended Class, you must write the examination appropriate for the specialty certificate (Adult, Paediatric, Primary Health Care) for which you have applied.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: NCLEX-RN
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/nclex-rn/
Title: Registered Nurse Examinations

Register to write the NGN, or learn more about:

preparing for the NGNthe purpose of the NGNwhat it does (and doesn’t) testwhat to do if you have to re-attempt the exam

Go now

Find resources to help you assist students with preparing for the NGN, and learn more about:

the purpose of the NGN and CNO’s rolethe contents of the examhow to receive ongoing exam results

Go now





In 2013, Council approved the professional examination for theOrdre des infirmières et infirmiers du Québec(also known as the Quebec Professional Examination) for registering as an RN in the General class. You must have passed this exam within three attempts.

Council continues to accept the CRNE for registering as an RN in the General Class if it was written before January 2015. You must have passed this exam within three attempts.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Exam Writers
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/nclex-rn/exam-writers/
Title: Exam Writers

Make your appointment on the NCSBN/Pearson VUE website.

Go now

If you've already written and passed the NCLEX-RN exam, youmay notneed to write it again. However, you must still meet all of the other requirements for registration in Ontario.Contact the Collegefor more information.

Do you have questions about:

registering for the NCLEX-RN?what the NCLEX-RN tests?the format of the exam?prep materials and resources?rewrites of the NCLEX-RN?the purpose of the NCLEX-RN?

Find answers on the following pages.

Go now

A handy list of resources that will provide writers with more information about the NCLEX-RN, including links to exam prep materials.

Go now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: NCLEX-RN Resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/nclex-rn/exam-writers/nclex-rn-resources/
Title: NCLEX-RN Resources

Preparing to write the NCLEX-RN? Below are resources to help you register and prepare.

Pearson Vue registration pageNCLEX-RN Candidate Bulletin

Test Plans: The NGN test plan provides a concise summary of the content and scope of the exam. It serves as a guide for both exam development and candidate preparation.Computer-Adaptive Testing: The NGN uses Computer-Adaptive Testing (CAT) to administer the exam. CAT is a method that merges computer technology with modern measurement theory to increase the efficiency of the exam process.Practice Test: The test plans contain in-depth information regarding exam content, exam administration, item writing tips and the inclusion of clinical judgment. The test plans guide candidates preparing for the exam, inform the direction for item development and facilitate classification of exam items. Practice tests are free of charge.

NCLEX-RN FAQsCanadian Educator and Student FAQsRepeat AttemptsFacts about the NGN for studentsPractice Analyses

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Next Generation NCLEX (NGN) for exam writers
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/nclex-rn/exam-writers/qas-about-the-nclex-rn-for-exam-writers/
Title: Next Generation NCLEX (NGN) for exam writers

Schedule your appointment by contacting Pearson VUE, the exam administrator.

Here are the steps:

Submit any requests for accommodation and supporting documents to CNObeforebooking your exam time with Pearson VUE. VisitRequesting Accommodations.

Be sure to give Pearson VUE the same name you provided to CNO when applying for registration. The name you give to CNO and Pearson VUEmust matchthe identification you present at the test centre when you arrive to write the exam. A difference in the name you provide could delay your testing.

Ontario's permanent test centres are located in Hamilton, London, Ottawa and Toronto. Temporary test centres are in Sudbury, Thunder Bay and Windsor. Temporary test centres are also set up in different locations throughout the year.Visit Pearson VUE's websitefor more information.

No. You can write the NGN at any Pearson VUE test centre that offers the exam. However, there is an additional fee if you write the exam outside of Canada or the U.S. See the "International Scheduling" section of theNGN Candidate Bulletin.

I just got my Authorization to Test. How soon should I schedule my exam?

We encourage you to schedule your exam as soon as you receive yourAuthorization to Test(ATT) from Pearson Vue because it is valid for a limited time.Do not wait until your ATT is close to expiration to schedule your examor you may have to reregister and pay another exam fee. It is also important tolocate your test sitebecause they can fill up quickly. CNO is not responsible for the fees you pay to the exam provider.

Yes. Your Ontario nursing education should prepare you to write the NGN because the exam tests competencies that nurses need at the beginning of their nursing careers in Ontario.

Test Plansprovide information about the exam structure, content areas and administration. The NCLEX Practice Exam (NPE) helps candidates prepare for the NCLEX by providing an exam similar to the one they’ll take on test day. It’s comprised of previously used NCLEX questions. The NPE is available in English for the NGN and NCLEX-PN, as well as a French version for the NGN.More information can be found here.

You should also familiarize yourself with the exam'scomputer-adaptive format.

See the full list of NGN resources.

Your nursing education and the resources above should be enough to prepare you for the NGN. Third-party vendors offer NGN preparation courses, but they are not associated with, or endorsed by, CNO. Since no third party has access to the NGN question bank, exam writers should be wary of any party claiming to have such access. We are aware of “American” content in some preparation courses. However, the exam does not test your knowledge of a particular health care system, history or legislation.

For information about Pearson VUE’s test centres and what you can expect on the day of your exam, read the “The Day of the Exam” section in theNGN Candidate Bulletin.

CNO will send you your exam results through the message centre of the online application portal. In most cases, we send results within one week of writing the exam.

There is no limit to the number of times you can write the NGN until you pass. Each time you are not successful, Pearson VUE will send you a Candidate’s Performance Report (CPR). This document provides information about how you did in each section of the exam, indicating whether you performed above, near or below the passing standard. Find more information aboutCPRson NCSBN’s website.

Review the list of NGN resources.

There is no limit to the number of times you can write the NGN until you pass. You can take the NCLEX once in any 45-day period (up to a maximum of eight times per year). However, you will also need to meet all other requirements to become registered to practice as a nurse in Ontario.

Yes. If you meet the exam eligibility requirements, there is no limit to the number of times you can rewrite the NGN. To do so, apply to CNO. CNO will assess your application to determine if you meet the requirements for registration. You will still have to pass the exam and meet the other requirements for registration.

CNO is sending letters to those who are eligible to have their application re-opened. If you would like CNO to re-open your application, you must meet all of the following criteria:

You met the current program requirement, which took effect on January 1, 2013You wrote and failed the NCLEX-RN on, or after, January 1, 2015The College's Registration Committee previously refused your application for registration as an RN, after you failed the registration exam the third time on, or after, January 1, 2015The College receives your Request to Reopen My RN form within 60 days of the date on your letter

If you qualify for and choose to have your application re-opened, you will not have to pay a new application fee if you make your request within 60 days of the date on your letter.

If you do not qualify to have your application re-opened, you may consider reapplying with a new application. (If you are an internationally educated nurse, you will need to begin your application process with the NNAS). You will still be required to pass the exam and meet all other requirements to be registered to practice as a nurse in Ontario.

You do not need to complete a new nursing program to reapply. The College will determine if your education meets program expectations.

Yes. If you meet the exam eligibility requirements, you can write the NGN. There is no limit to the number of times you can write this exam.

First,reapply to CNO. CNO will determine if you meet the current requirements for registration. You will still have to pass the exam and meet the other requirements for registration.

You do not need to complete a new nursing program to re-apply. CNO will determine if your education program meets expectations.

You can take the NGN once in any 45-day period (up to a maximum of eight times per year).

The NGN does not test everything that is taught during a four-year baccalaureate nursing program. Rather, the NGN tests entry-level skills, knowledge and judgment – what nurses need to know to provide safe care at the beginning of their careers. For example, it asks questions about pain management, medication administration, basic care and comfort, infection control, health promotion and maintenance, and concepts such as maintaining confidentiality of patient information.

In addition, all drug names are generic and refer to medications that entry-level nurses are expected to know. Measurements are provided in metric.

No. The NGN does not test knowledge of health care systems, history, cultural issues, or government policy and laws. Not only do such items vary by province and territory in Canada, they vary across the U.S. While nurses have to know about the health care system they work in, including its legislation, testing for that knowledge is not the purpose of the NGN.

Applicants to CNO write aJurisprudence Examthat tests for this knowledge.

Yes. Canadian nurses, including clinical educators, review the content of the NGN. They continue to review and develop the exam to ensure it meets our needs as regulators and the needs of the public for safe nursing care.

Computer-adaptive testing (CAT) is the format of the NGN. CAT programs determine the level of difficulty of questions they present to writers, based on how well writers responded to the preceding question. For example, if a writer responds correctly to a question of medium difficulty, the next question will be slightly more difficult.This videoprovides you with more information about the CAT format of the NGN.

There is no set number of questions. It depends on how long it takes the algorithm to determine whether the writer is consistently performing above, or below, passing level. The fewest number of scored questions needed to determine this is 70; the most is 135.

The process of developing the French version of the NGN is rigorous. Canadian translators use federal government-level standards to translate the questions. Translations are reviewed by Canadian nurses who are fluent in French and English, and who work in bilingual health care settings or facilities. Any items they do not approve are removed from the French version.You can access Lexicon terms here.

All items that appear on an English version of the exam at any given period have been translated into French. We have not translated all items in the exam bank, which number in the thousands. This method ensures both versions have identical items and measurements.

As Ontario’s nursing regulator, CNO is accountable for ensuring that it grants registration only to those who demonstrate the nursing knowledge to provide safe care.

Registration exams such as the NGN contribute to patient safety. The NGN tests whether the writer has the knowledge, skill and judgment to provide safe care during their first year of practice. As the provincial regulator of the nursing profession, we are accountable for ensuring that only those who demonstrate the ability to apply nursing knowledge and provide safe care are able to practice in Ontario.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nurse Educators and Schools
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/nclex-rn/nurse-educators-and-schools/
Title: Nurse Educators and Schools

Do you have questions about:

preparing your students for the exam?what prep materials and resources are available?what to do if a student has to re-write the exam?the content and format of the exam?

The Q&As on the following page will provide you with answers.

Go now

A handy list of links to materials and resources that will provide educators with more information about the NCLEX-RN and prep materials to share with students.

Go now

RN volunteers are needed to develop and review NCLEX-RN exam items. Read the criteria and other details about this volunteer position.

Go now

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: NCLEX-RN Resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/nclex-rn/nurse-educators-and-schools/nclex-rn-resources/
Title: NCLEX-RN Resources

Preparing students to write the NCLEX-RN? Refer them to the resource in the Exam Writer section, and learn more about the NCLEX-RN yourself with the following resources.

NCLEX-RN FAQsCanadian Educator and Student FAQsRepeat AttemptsComputer-Adaptive TestingPractice Analyses

Test PlansPractice Test



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Next Generation NCLEX (NGN): FAQ for educators and schools
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/nclex-rn/nurse-educators-and-schools/qas-about-the-nclex-for-educators-and-schools/
Title: Next Generation NCLEX (NGN): FAQ for educators and schools

You can refer students to:

Test Plans, which provide information about exam structure, content and administrationReview for the NCLEX-RN Examinationcourse, which allows writers to prepare at their own pace. (Note: there is a cost to use this resource)A video and list of FAQs that explain thecomputer-adaptive formatof the NGN.

Educators should familiarize themselves withTest Plans, and can enroll inUnderstanding the NGN. This online course will provide you with information about the exam's history, format, testing methods and processes.

Your students’ nursing education and the resources mentioned above should be enough to prepare for the NGN. While third-party vendors offer NGN preparation courses, they are not associated with, or endorsed by, CNO or the exam provider. No third party has access to the NGN question bank; exam writers should be wary of any party claiming to have such access. We are aware of “American” content in some preparation courses. However, the exam does not test a writer’s knowledge of a particular health care system, history or legislation.

First, be encouraging. It is not unusual for a writer to make an unsuccessful attempt, but to succeed later on.

As an educator, you are in an excellent position to support students developing study plans. Students who do not pass the NGN receive a Candidate’s Performance Report (CPR). This report provides the writer with information about how they did in each section of the exam. Help your students review the CPR and relate it to the content of their nursing program, reminding them of content from earlier years.

The National Council of State Boards of Nursing's (NCSBN's)After the Exampage includes information about using the CPR to help students prepare for re-writing the exam.

Finally, encourage the student to review the prep material on the NCBSN website.

Canadian schools can subscribe to twice-yearly exam results reports for their programs from Mountain Measurement. Mountain Measurement is the company that compiles and analyzes NGN data. Schools that subscribe receive results reports for their programs in May and November.

To learn more, see a sample results report and subscribe, visit Mountain Measurement’sNGN Program Reports page.

See the College’s comprehensiveNursing Registration Exams Report, which includes individual program results and NGN results for each year.

No. The NGN does not test knowledge of health care systems, history, cultural issues, or government policy and laws. Not only do such items vary by province and territory in Canada, they vary across states in the U.S.

While nurses working in any specific jurisdictions have to know about the health care system they work in, including legislation, testing for that knowledge is not the purpose of the NGN. Applicants to CNO write aJurisprudence Examthat tests for this.

Yes. Canadian nurses, including clinical educators, reviewed the content for the current NGN. They continue to review and develop the exam to ensure it meets CNO’s needs as regulators, and the public's need for safe nursing care.

Periodically, NCSBN seeks Canadian nurse volunteers to review the NGN; see theVolunteer section.

Computer-adaptive testing (CAT) is the format of the NGN exam. Using CAT, the program determines the level of difficulty of the question it presents to the writer based on how well they responded to the preceding question.

For example, if a writer responded correctly to a question of medium difficulty, the next question presented will be slightly more difficult. Thisvideowill provide you with more information about CAT and its use in the NGN.

As Ontario’s nursing regulator, CNO is accountable for ensuring that registration is granted only to those who demonstrate the nursing knowledge to provide safe care. We regularly review processes for assessing this knowledge, to determine the most accessible, fair and efficient approaches. The NGN meets our requirement for being a valid exam for doing this. It also meets the needs of writers, by giving them year-round access to the exam and issuing of results quickly.

For more information about developing and administering the NGN, seeCanadian Educators & Students FAQs.

Registration exams, such as the NGN, contribute to patient safety. The NGN tests whether the writer has the knowledge, skill and judgment to provide safe care during their first year of practice. As the provincial regulator of the nursing profession, CNO is accountable for ensuring that only those who demonstrate the ability to apply nursing knowledge and provide safe care are able to practice in Ontario.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Next Generation NCLEX exam
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/nclex-rn/next-generation-nclex/
Title: Next Generation NCLEX exam

Starting April 2023, an updated NCLEX-RN exam will be renamed the Next Generation NCLEX (NGN) exam. The NCLEX-RN tests competency of nursing applicants and is a registration requirement.

The NGN exam will also be aComputer Adaptive Test (CAT)in which the questions are geared to the level of the person completing the exam. The questions are reflective of nursing practice today and test the writer’s clinical judgment.

The NGN exam will continue to have standalone questions.  What is new is that approximately 22-33 percent of the questions will be case studies that are reflective of nursing practice today. These case studies will test the writer’s clinical judgment, specifically critical decisions nurses must make in a variety of healthcare settings. The questions focus on interactions between nurse and client, the client's needs and expected outcomes.

These questions, like all NCLEX exam questions, have been tested for the past several years as unscored questions on the current NCLEX exam.

TheNCSBN Next Generation NCLEX websitehas resources to help applicants prepare to write the NGN starting in April 2023. These resources include FAQs, webinars and practice exams.

The NGN exam uses both standalone questions and a smaller percentage of case studies. These case studies are like those you see in nursing practice and reflect the kinds of critical decisions nurses must make in a variety of healthcare settings. They focus on interactions between nurse and client, the client's needs and expected outcomes.

Each case study is composed of six items, each item measuring the elements of NCSBN’sClinical Judgment Measurement Model.  All exam writers will see three scored case studies and each case study is composed of six items, for a total of 18 items. TheNCSBN NCLEX-RN websitehas more information on the format.

No, starting April 1, 2023, the NGN will be the only registration exam available for RN applicants.

Yes, NCSBN has a practice exam that gives you the look and feel of your test-day exam. You can find more information on thethe NCSBNNCLEX-RN practice examwebsite.

You can find more information on NCSBN’sNGN FAQs for Educators page.

Test plans will be posted on theNCSBN NCLEX-RN websitewhen available.

NCSBN’sClinical Judgment Measurement Modelwas developed by NCSBN researchers as a framework for the valid measurement of clinical judgment and decision-making within the context of a standardized exam.

Yes, NCSBN'sNGN Talks & Videos pagehas videos with overview information about different aspects of the exam.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) Registration Examinations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/rpn-exam/
Title: Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) Registration Examinations

Before you can become a Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) in Ontario, you must successfully complete a registration exam that measures the competencies required of RPNs at the beginning of their nursing career in Ontario. As of Jan. 4, 2022, the Regulatory Exam – Practical Nurse (REx-PN™) replaced the CPNRE as the regulatory exam for RPN applicants to CNO.

No limit on writes:Because the REx-PN will be a computerized adaptive test (CAT), there are no limits on the number of times a writer can attempt it. The system knows if a writer is retaking the exam and supplies them with a set of questions different from those the writer received in previous attempts.

No exam windows:There are no longer be exam-writing windows. You will be able to schedule an exam appointment at the time and place of your choosing to write the REx-PN.

For more information, visitFAQs about REx-PN.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: REX-PN: Frequently asked questions
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/rpn-exam/faq-rexpn/
Title: REX-PN: Frequently asked questions

The Regulatory Exam – Practical Nurse (REx-PN™) is an entry-to-practice exam for those applying to become a Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) in Ontario or Licensed Practical Nurse (LPN) in British Columbia. Implemented on January 4, 2022, it tests for the knowledge, skill and judgment Practical Nurses need at the beginning of their careers to practice safely.

Registration exams such as the REx-PN contribute to patient safety. As provincial regulators of the nursing profession, CNO and the British Columbia  College of Nurses and Midwives are accountable for ensuring that only those who demonstrate the ability to apply nursing knowledge and provide safe care at the beginning of their careers are able to practice nursing. The registration exam helps to do this.

The new exam was implemented on January 4, 2022. We established this timing with nursing education programs in Ontario and British Columbia to give educators time to include the revised entry-to-practice competencies in their curriculum, and support students in preparing for the REx-PN.

As Ontario’s nursing regulator, CNO is accountable for ensuring that it grants registration only to those who demonstrate the nursing knowledge needed to provide safe care. We regularly review processes for assessing this knowledge to determine the most accessible, fair and efficient approaches.

The REx-PN will meet our requirements for being a valid, reliable and secure exam. It will also meet the needs of exam writers by giving them year-round access to the exam and faster results.

The REx-PN is based on data collected from an analysis of RPN/LPN practice conducted in early 2019, a process that will be repeated every five years. In addition, revised national entry-to-practice competencies were mapped to the Practice Analysis to ensure the competencies essential for safe nursing practice are included on the exam.

Before writing the REx-PN, PN students will have completed an educational program designed to teach them the knowledge, skills and judgment to prepare them to enter the nursing profession. Nursing candidates’ academic preparation provides a starting point for them to practice in a variety of settings. In complement, the REx-PN will assess whether PN candidates possess the minimal entry-level competence to provide safe and effective care.

Yes. Nurses in Ontario and British Columbia review the content of the REx-PN. They continue to review and develop the exam to ensure it meets our needs as regulators, and the needs of the public for safe nursing care.

To meet the needs of French-speaking Canadian REx-PN candidates, the exam is offered in French. A third party will translate questions following best practice and recommended standards. A panel of French PN academics  familiar with nurse practice settings developed a lexicon that is informing third-party translation.You can see the Lexicon terms here. The third party translates questions following the lexicon, best practice and recommended standards.

Once the questions are translated, a Canadian Translation Panel made up of French-speaking Canadian nurses reviews each translated question for accuracy and contextual equivalency.

This method (referred to as a mixed-method, process-oriented approach) is supported in the literature as a preferred method for ensuring construct equivalence in health care measurement instruments.

PN programs in Ontario and British Columbia pre-tested the exam items with student volunteers who were preparing to graduate in 2020 and 2021. The results are being used to determine the difficulty level for each question, which is a critical feature of computerized adaptive testing (CAT). Questions are flagged if they need to be revised, re-tested or possibly removed from the bank of questions. After implementing the exam in 2022, all new questions that are developed are pre-tested on the REx-PN.

Regardless of the number of writes, the only way a writer will be successful on the REx-PN is if they are able to show they have the knowledge, skill and judgment to practice safely as an entry-level PN. Each person who writes the exam will have a different set of questions. There is no risk of memorizing content because the software system behind the REx-PN knows when someone is rewriting the exam and generates a new set of questions for them each time.

The REx-PN exam is a Computerized Adaptive Test (CAT) instead of a traditional multiple-choice exam. During a CAT exam, the exam writer must sustain a pre-determined level of difficulty to show their ability. Whether they pass the exam on their first try or any subsequent try, they won’t be passing by chance or because they memorized test content. They will pass because they have the ability, which helps to keep the public safe.

The Canadian Practical Nurse Registration Exam (CPNRE) was available until the end of 2021. On January 4, 2022, the REx-PN became the registration exam for Ontario Practical Nurses. The CPNRE is no longer be an option for Ontario applicants.If you passed the CPNRE by the end of 2021 as part of your CNO application, you meet CNO’s registration exam requirement, even if you have not completed the other requirements of your registration by that time.

VisitNational Council of State Boards of Nursing’s websitefor more FAQs.

No. You can write the REx-PN at any Pearson VUE test centre that offers the exam. However, there will be an additional fee if you write the exam outside of Canada or the U.S.

The fee to write the REx-PN is $350 (plus applicable taxes) per attempt. This is non-refundable. Check theApplication & Membership Feespage for the latest information on additional fees applying to your RPN application and registration in the General class.

Please note that if you pay to write the CPNRE and decide to withdraw, we cannot transfer the CPNRE exam fees to the REx-PN. However, you can use the amount as a credit to pay another CNO fee (such as a membership fee).

Yes, the REx-PN tests competencies that nurses need at the beginning of their nursing careers to practice safely in Ontario, as covered by your nursing program’s curriculum.

Yes, resources have been or are being developed. These include:

Test plan, inEnglishandFrenchComputerized Adaptive Test (CAT) educational video and presentations, inEnglishandFrenchFrequently Asked Questions (FAQs), in English and FrenchAnexam previewthat allows you to review exam items similar to the REx-PN items you’ll see on test day. The preview is a static exam that can be downloaded in English and French. The exam preview is not scored nor a predictor of whether you will pass or fail your actual REx-PN. The 125 items included in this preview will not appear on the current or future examsApractice exam, in English and FrenchREx-PN Tutorial, in English and FrenchREx-PN Candidate Bulletin, in English and French

You may find preparatory courses helpful in preparing to write the exam, but choosing what will help you prepare is your decision. Your nursing education and the resources on this page should be enough to prepare you for writing the REx-PN. Third-party vendors may develop and offer REx-PN preparation courses, but it is important to know that they do not have access to the REx-PN question bank. CNO is aware of some preparation courses being developed in English, but we cannot vouch for their success in helping someone write the REx-PN. To date, we are not aware of any preparation courses produced in French, although we continue to make inquiries.

The REx-PN Test Plan (EN;FR) is an excellent guide to preparing for the exam. It’s a concise summary of the content areas and scope of what is tested on the exam. It also includes: definitions for each Client Needs category; nursing activity statements; sample REx-PN questions; and information about the format of the exam and how it will be scored.

The lab values an exam writer is expected to know are on page 36 of the REx-PN Test Plan (EN;FR). They include the lab values for ABGs (pH, PO2, PCO2, SaO2, HCO3), BUN, cholesterol (total), creatinine, glucose, glycosylated hemoglobin (HgbA1C), hematocrit, hemoglobin, INR, platelets, potassium, PT, PTT & APTT, sodium, and WBC. All other values will be provided

There is no limit on the number of times applicants can write the exam before they pass. Because the REx-PN will be a computerized adaptive test (CAT), the system knows if a writer is retaking the exam. The system supplies different questions than those the writer had in previous attempts. Regardless of the number of attempts, the only way a person will successfully pass the REx-PN is if they are able to show they have the knowledge, skill and judgment to practice safely as an entry-level RPN.

The REx-PN is available to write at any time in permanent and temporary centres of the exam provider, Pearson VUE. REx-PN writers will have to wait at least 60 days between attempts, which is maximum of six attempts per year.

There is no time limit for each question, however there is a limit of four hours to complete the overall exam. On similar exams, candidates generally take 60 – 90 seconds per question. Writers should not feel the need to rush. For more information on the time limit, please see the “Examination Length” section in theREx-PN Test Plan.

Use Pearson VUE’sTest Site Locatorto find the test centre nearest you

There is no limit to the number of times you can write the REx-PN until you pass. You can take the REx-PN once in any 60-day period (up to a maximum of six times per year). However, once you pass you will still need to meetall other requirementsto become registered to practice as a nurse in Ontario.

If you do not pass, CNO will send you a Candidate’s Performance Report (CPR). This document provides information about how you did in each section of the exam, indicating whether you performed above, near or below the passing standard. Find more information aboutCPRson NCSBN’s website.

If you fail, you will receive a Candidate’s Performance Report (CPR). This is a breakdown of your results including content areas that had deficiencies on the exam. You can then use this information to determine additional learning you may need to complete to increase your ability and overall competence. For example, this could mean studying more in one area, getting additional academic help, or taking a continuing education course on a specific topic to improve your knowledge.

If your application remains open with CNO and you meet the exam eligibility requirements, you will be able to write the REx-PN. There is no limit to the number of times you can write the REx-PN.

If you graduated from a nursing program in Canada, you can apply directly to CNO. We will assess your credentials to ensure you’re eligible to write the REx-PN.

If you received your nursing education in another country, visit theNational Nursing Assessment Service(NNAS) website for the steps you need to take. Once NNAS has given you your RPN Advisory Report for CNO, you can begin your application with us. We will assess your credentials for exam eligibility for the REx-PN.

The REx-PN does not test everything that is taught in a PN program. Rather, it tests entry-level skills, knowledge and judgment — what nurses need to know to provide safe care at the beginning of their careers. TheREx-PN Test Plandescribes what is tested.

No. The REx-PN does not test knowledge of health care systems, history, cultural issues, or government policy and laws. Such items vary by province and territory in Canada. While nurses must know about the health care system they work in, including its legislation, testing for that knowledge is not the purpose of the REx-PN.

Applicants to CNO write aJurisprudence Examthat tests for this knowledge.

The exam format is Computerized Adaptive Testing (CAT). Using CAT, the system determines the level of difficulty of the question it presents to the writer based on how well they responded to the preceding question. For example, if a writer responded correctly to a question of medium difficulty, the next question presented will be slightly more difficult. A candidate must achieve a certain ability level on the exam to pass.

This videoprovides you with more information about the CAT format of the REx-PN.

The number of questions exam writers receive ranges from a minimum of 90 to a maximum of 150. The actual number of questions the writer must answer depends on how long it takes the exam’s algorithm to determine whether the writer is consistently performing above or below passing level. Of all the questions the writer receives, 60 to 120 questions count in the exam writer’s score. The remaining 30 are being pre-tested for possible inclusion on future exams and do not count in the score.

Pre-testing is required to ensure CAT exams function properly. By administering pre-test items to a large sample of REx-PN writers, the degree of difficulty of each question can be determined. The writer will not be able to distinguish between an unscored pre-test question and a scored question on the REx-PN, so exam writers should give each question their best effort.

At this time, the REx-PN uses generic medication names only, in most cases. This is because generic names are more consistent, while brand/trade names may vary. Some items may refer to general classifications of medications. A list of medications that are on the exam is not provided.

No. The exam states relevant practice settings if they are relevant to any questions.

Since the exam is acomputerized adaptive test (CAT), this answer requires some explanation. A CAT is designed to measure the writer’s ability: their entry-level nursing knowledge, skill and judgment. Each question is rated at a different level of difficulty. Some questions are easier to answer than others.

Every time a writer answers a question, the computer re-estimates their ability level based on all previous answers and the difficulty of those questions. This gives the computer as much information as possible about the writer’s ability to provide safe care. With each question answered, the computer’s estimate of the writer’s ability becomes more precise.

Therefore, there is no set number of questions to answer. Rather, a writer passes the exam when the computer determines they are above the passing standard: a cut point that marks the minimum ability level required to practice nursing safely and effectively as an entry-level RPN in today’s health care environment. To learn more about the passing standard, including how it is determined, visitREx-PN Passing Standard | NCSBN.

As described in theREx-PN test plan, there are many different types of questions on the REx-PN. Most of the questions are multiple-choice, while others are multiple response; fill-in-the-blank calculation; exhibit; and graphic. You can access theCandidate Tutorialto familiarize yourself with each type.

Yes. On the computer, exam questions are numbered so you will know how many questions you’ve responded to.

No. Given thecomputerized adaptive test (CAT)format of the exam, you cannot go back to previous questions or skip questions. With a CAT, every time you answer a question on the exam, the computer re-estimates your ability based on all previous answers and the difficulty level of those questions. Using this process, the computer gets as much information as possible about the writer’s ability to provide safe care. With each question answered, the computer’s estimate of the writer’s ability becomes more precise.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Preparing for the REx-PN
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/rpn-exam/preparing-for-rexpn/
Title: Preparing for the REx-PN

The following are strategies to consider when preparing to write the REx-PN.

Applicants may choose to use all or some of these suggestions or may decide to develop their own strategies for taking the test. Regardless of how they choose to prepare for their test, all applicants should evaluate their learning needs and upgrade their skills and knowledge where needed before attempting the test.

Review CNO’spractice documents.If you are an internationally educated nurse, consider enrolling in a program offered by an educational institution designed to help applicants to CNO become familiar with current nursing practice in Ontario.If English or French is not your first language, take an English or French language course that emphasizes both written and oral skills.Consider joining a nursing peer support group. These groups can provide suggestions for preparing to write the exam.Review theTest Plan. The Test Plan details the content areas that the REx-PN tests. It also describes how the exam is structured, including length and scoring.Review the freeexam preview, which can be downloaded in English and French. The preview allows you to review exam items similar to the REx-PN items you’ll see on test day. The preview is a static exam that is not scored nor a predictor of whether you will pass or fail your actual REx-PN. The 125 items included in this preview will not appear on the current or future exams

Some applicants may choose to enrol in an examination preparation course that may help them review content and learn techniques for computer adaptive tests.

You may find prep courses helpful in preparing to write the exam, but the choice of what will help you prepare is yours.Third-party vendors may develop and offer REx-PNpreparation courses, but it is important to know that they do not have access to the REx-PN question bank. CNO is aware of some prep courses being developed in English but cannot attest to their success in helping someone to prepare to write the REx-PN.

For more information about preparing for the exam,visit the REx-PN website.

Fact Sheet 1: General InformationFact Sheet 2: Preparing for the REx-PNFact Sheet 3: Writing the REx-PNREx-PN Webinar for PN Students and ApplicantsREx-PN Resources for Practical Nurse educators

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: REx-PN Webinar for PN Students and Applicants
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/rpn-exam/rex-pn-webinar/
Title: REx-PN Webinar for PN Students and Applicants

On Tuesday, Jan. 4, 2022, a new exam for RPN applicants (REx-PN™) will replace the CPNRE as the official registration exam for Practical Nurses.

This webinar recording is an overview of the new exam for RPN applicants, the REx-PN. The webinar is intended to help PN students and applicants prepare to take the REx-PN, which begins in January 2022.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Process for scheduling your REx-PN exam
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/rpn-exam/rexpn-scheduling-process/
Title: Process for scheduling your REx-PN exam

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nurse Practitioner examinations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/np-exam/
Title: Nurse Practitioner Examinations

Everyone who applies to practise as a Nurse Practitioner in Ontario must successfully complete an examination approved by the College’s Council for the NP specialty in which they are applying to practise.

You will have three chances to successfully complete an NP exam approved for your specialty. SeeRepeat Attemptsto learn what happens when you have reached your maximum number of tries on an exam.

AdultPaediatricsPrimary Health Care

AdultPaediatricsPrimary Health Care



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: NP-Adult (Ontario)
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/np-exam/ontario-adult/
Title: NP-Adult (Ontario)

The following examination has been approved for Ontario NP candidates applying to the College of Nurses of Ontario for the Adult specialty certificate:

You have up to three attempts to pass this exam.

The first step in applying to write this exam is togo online and applyfor a Nurse Practitioner Certificate of Registration. Once you have done this, you can then apply for the exam by:

Reading the Canadian Council of Registered Nurse Regulators' fact sheet titled,Adult-Gerontology Primary Care Nurse Practitioner Exam.Completing the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certification Board'sdisclosure of information form. Please email the completed form tocno@cnomail.org, stating "NP Exam Consent Form" in the subject line of your email.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: NP-Paediatrics (Ontario)
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/np-exam/ontario-paediatrics/
Title: NP-Paediatrics (Ontario)

The following examinations have been approved for Ontario NP candidates applying to the College of Nurses of Ontario for the Paediatrics specialty certificate:

You have up to three attempts to pass this exam.

The first step in applying to write this exam is to go online and apply for a Nurse Practitioner Certificate of Registration. Once you have done this, you can then apply for the exam by:

Reading the Canadian Council of Registered Nurse Regulators' fact sheet titled,Pediatric Primary Care Nurse Practitioner Exam.Completing the Pediatric Nursing Certification Board'sdisclosure of information form. Email the completed form tocno@cnomail.org, stating "NP Exam Consent Form" in the subject line of your email.

At this time, there is no information about the next offering of the neonatology examination. More information will be posted here when available.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: NP-Primary Health Care (Ontario)
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/np-exam/ontario-primary-healthy-care/
Title: NP-Primary Health Care (Ontario)

TheCanadian Nurse Practitioner Examination (CNPE: F/AA) is administeredby Yardstick Assessment Strategies Inc. This exam is approved for NP candidates applying to the College of Nurses of Ontario for the Primary Health Care specialty certificate.

The exam is based on the 2018: CNPE F/AA Blueprint and has 170-190 multiple choice questions written over a four-hour period. The CNPE blueprint and preparatory tool are available atwww.ccrnr.ca/familyall-ages.html.

You have up to three attempts to pass this exam.

The Canadian Nurse Practitioner Examination is a computer-based exam.

Note:

Once CNO has determined that you are eligible to write the CNPE, you must submit your exam registration through CNO's online portal. CNO will then send your information to Yardstick.You will be granted access to Yardstick’s seat reservation and examination delivery website. Approximately 4 weeks before the scheduled exam, you will receive an email notification from Yardstick. You will then be able to choose your test centre location, access the examination platform tutorial and pay your examination fee.If you want to request any changes to your examination, contact Yardstick atsupport@yas.getyardstick.com. Changes can only be made up to 10 business days before your exam. For more information, read theCandidate Examination Handbook by Yardstick.Candidates that requireaccommodationfor writing the exam should contact CNO at least 90 days before the examination.The CNPE blueprint and preparatory tool are available atwww.ccrnr.ca/familyall-ages.html.

You must bring a piece of unexpired government-issued photo identification and a copy of the email that Yardstick sent to you to confirm your booking. Acceptable forms of identification are: a valid passport, a driver's licence or a Permanent Resident card.

For more information, read theCanadian Examination Handbook by Yardstick.

You will be notified about your results six weeks after the examination. Results will not be released over the phone.

It is important that you notify the College promptly of any change of name or contact information during the examination process to ensure you receive your exam results. Requests for name changes must be accompanied by a legal document, such as a marriage certificate.

Questions?Contact the College's Customer Service Centre at 416 928-0900 (toll-free in Canada 1 800 387-5526), or e-mailexams@cnomail.org.

You have the option to request a re-score of your CNPE results.

If you would like to have your CNPE exam results re-scored, please submit your request to CNO atenp@cnomail.orgwith the subject line, “CNPE Re-score Request.”

Please provide the following details when submitting your request:

Your first and last nameYour application or registration numberThe date you wrote the exam

You can request a re-score within two months of receiving your score.

There is a fee of $110.00 for the re-score request.CNO does not collect payment information in writing.Once your request is received, CNO will contact you about making your payment. Please do not contact CNO to provide payment until we have notified you that your request has been received.

We will only submit your re-score request to the exam provider once we receive your written request and your payment has been processed.

Questions?Contact the College's Customer Service Centre at 416 928-0900 (toll-free in Canada 1 800 387-5526), or e-mail at cno@cnomail.org.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Outside Ontario
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/np-exam/outside-ontario-adult/
Title: Graduates of NP Programs Outside Ontario

The following examinations have been recognized by the College for applicants to the Extended Class who completed a Nurse Practitioner program in a jurisdiction outside Ontario.

Adult-Gerontology Primary Care Nurse Practitioner Certification Examination(if written in January 2013 or later)The American Academy of Nurse Practitioners Certification Board (AANPCB)

For information about this exam, please read thefact sheeton the Canadian Council of RN Regulators’website.

Adult Nurse Practitioner Examination(if written between 2002 and September 2016)The American Nurses Credentialing CenterNote: This exam is no longer offered by the American Nurses Credentialing Center as of September 1, 2016.

Pediatric Nurse Practitioner Primary Care Certification Examination(if written in December 1995 or later)The Pediatric Nursing Certification BoardFor information about this exam, please read thefact sheeton the Canadian Council of RN Regulators’website.

Certification Examination for Nurse Practitioners Specializing in Neonatology(if completed in 2006 or later)Ordre des infirmières et infirmiers du QuébecPediatric Nurse Practitioner Examination(if written in January 2002 or later)The American Nurses Credentialing Center

Neonatal Nurse Practitioner Certification(if written in January 1994 or later)The National Certification Corporation

Canadian Nurse Practitioner Examination(if written in January 2005 or later)Yardstick Assessment Strategies Inc.

More information

Family Nurse Practitioner Certification Examination(if written in October 2001 or later)The American Nurses Credentialing CenterFamily Nurse Practitioner Certification Examination(if written in January 2013 or later)The American Academy of Nurse Practitioners CertificationBoard (AANPCB)

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Jurisprudence examination
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/jurisprudence-examination/
Title: Jurisprudence Examination

The College of Nurses of Ontario’s (CNO’s) jurisprudence examination assesses an applicant’s knowledge and understanding of the laws, regulations, by-laws and practice standards and guidelines that govern the nursing profession in Ontario.

All applicants wishing to register in the General, Temporary, or Special Assignment classes must successfully pass theRegistered Nurse (RN)/Registered Practical Nurse (RPN) Jurisprudence Examination.

Applicants wishing to register as Nurse Practitioners (NPs) must pass theRegistered Nurse (Extended Class) Jurisprudence Examination.

The jurisprudence examination isnotpart of annual renewal, and current registrants willnotbe required to take the exam unless they are applying to change their category or class. (For example, a nurse in the General Class applying to join the Extended Class, or an RPN registrant applying to become an RN registrant needs to have passed the jurisprudence examination.)

The examination is completed online through a secure learning management website that can be accessed only by applicants to CNO. Examination pass results are valid for five years.

It’s important to note that the jurisprudence examination is the same when applying to become an RN or an RPN. Therefore, if a current RPN registrant wants to become a RN registrant, or vice versa, they will not have to write the examination unless they:

The jurisprudence examination consists of an e-learning module with a multiple-choice examination.

The examination assesses the applicant’s knowledge and understanding of the nursing profession in Ontario. The RN/RPN and RN(EC) jurisprudence e-learning modules will each feature five chapters.

Chapter 1 - Nursing regulationRole of the regulatorConcept of public protectionKey legislation governing nursing practice in OntarioChapter 2 - Scope of practiceLegal scope of practice for nursing in Ontario as set out in legislationNursing roles and responsibilitiesChapter 3 - Professional accountability and responsibilityComponents of the therapeutic nurse-client relationshipProfessional boundariesMandatory reportingProfessional misconductChapter 4 - CNO Practice StandardsPractice standards and ethical considerations that outline expectations of nurses to protect the publicChapter 5 - Quality assurance (QA) and continuing competencePurpose and components of CNO’s QA programSelf-assessment, practice assessment and peer assessmentContinuing competence

Laws, regulations and standards of practice unique to NP practice in Ontario are also assessed in theRN(EC) Jurisprudence Examination. CNO has developed a guide to support applicants in navigating the jurisprudence exam on the CNO learning management platform.

Both theRN/RPN Jurisprudence ExaminationandRN(EC) Jurisprudence Examinationconsist of multiple-choice questions designed to assess an applicant’s competencies at three different levels of cognitive ability:

Knowledge and comprehension– the ability to recall and understand relevant contentApplication– the ability to apply knowledge and comprehension in a straightforward situationCritical thinking– the ability to apply knowledge and comprehension in complex situations through analytical problem solving

CNO has developed a sample of thetypes of questions you can expect to seeon the jurisprudence examination.

The jurisprudence examinations are completed online and accessed by the applicant through a secure website.

Once applicants have submitted their CNO application online and paid the application fee, they will receive a message in theirMaintain Your Membership (MYM) applicant portalinforming them to pay the jurisprudence examination fee to access the exam. Once payment is received, a follow up message and link in the MYM portal will give applicants access to the online examination through a secure website.

TheRN/RPN Jurisprudence Examinationconsists of 50 multiple-choice questions. Applicants have 30 days from the date their payment is processed to take the jurisprudence examination.

TheRN(EC) Jurisprudence Examinationconsists of 50 multiple-choice questions. Applicants  have 30 days from the date their payment is processed to take the jurisprudence examination.

Jurisprudence examinations are “open-book” exams, which means that applicants may use online or offline resources, such as, laws, regulations or CNO’s practice standards, while writing the examination. However, since there is a wide range of material covered, it is strongly recommended that applicants do a thorough review of therecommended study materialbefore taking the examination.

The examination is intended to be written by individuals working on their own. It cannot be written together with other applicants.

ReviewFrequently Asked Questions: Jurisprudence Examinationfor answers to questions on exam eligibility, preparation and navigating through the exam.

There is a fee of $40 (CDN), plus applicable taxes, to write the jurisprudence examination. Applicants can pay the fee through their MYM applicant portal account. Upon receipt of payment, the applicant can attempt the jurisprudence examination.

Applicants have 30 days to access and write the exam. Within the 30 days’ access period, the applicant can reattempt the examination to pass, at no extra cost. If a rewrite is required, applicants will have to wait one hour before attempting the examination again. Applicants may complete the exam at their own pace; you maycomplete it in one sitting or save your place in the exam, return to it later and resume where you left off.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Sample Exam Questions
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/jurisprudence-examination/sample-test-questions/
Title: Jurisprudence Examination: Sample Exam Questions

The following questions are examples of the types of questions you can expect on the Jurisprudence Exam. Note that these specific questions willnotbe on the exam.

Answer: B and D

A) This is not the correct component.B) The nurse is demonstrating client-centred care by empathizing with the father and providing information about the surgery.C) This is not the correct componentD) The nurse is demonstrating therapeutic communication by listening to the father’s concerns, empathizing with him and providing information about the surgery.

Reference:Therapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship

Answer: C.

A) Nurses should be accountable for all errors made.B) All errors should be reported so that appropriate action can be taken.C) This is according to the standard.D) Nurses should be accountable for all errors made.

Reference:Medication Practice Standard

Answer:  D.

A) The original order was made by an RPN and a controlled act cannot be ordered by an RPN.B) A controlled act cannot be ordered by an RPN.C) A controlled act cannot be ordered by an RPN.D) An RPN cannot order another nurse to perform a controlled act.

Reference:Scope of Practice Standard

Answer: B

A) The employer may investigate but the legislation requires the allegation be investigated by the College.B) The College is required under the RHPA to investigate all complaints.C) This might be an outcome of the complaint but not at this point.D) Not the obligation of the College.

Reference:Addressing Complaints at the College of Nurses of Ontario: Process Guide



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Study Resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/jurisprudence-examination/study-resources/
Title: Jurisprudence Examination: Study Resources

The following is a list of resources recommended by the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) to help applicants prepare for theirJurisprudence Examination.

The jurisprudence examination consists of a learning module with an examination component. While the examination is considered “open book,” and applicants are free to access resources while writing the examination, they are strongly encouraged to familiarize themselves with the information in the following documents before starting the examination.

How to Guide - Jurisprudence Examination is available when you log into the online examination

About CNOEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Registered NursesEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Ontario Registered Practical NursesEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Nurse PractitionersEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Nurse Practitioners- will takeeffect September 2024

Code of ConductScope of PracticeConfidentiality and Privacy - Personal Health InformationDocumentation, Revised 2008MedicationNurse PractitionerTherapeutic Nurse-Client Relationship, Revised 2006

Conflict Prevention and ManagementConsentDirectivesIndependent PracticeRefusing Assignments and Discontinuing Nursing ServicesTelepracticeWorking in Different RolesWorking With Unregulated Care Providers

Registering as a Nurse in OntarioQuality Assurance ProgramAddressing Complaints at CNOReporting Guide

Understanding RestraintsDisagreeing With the Plan of CareSupporting LearnersAsk Practice FAQsAn Introduction to theNursing Act, 1991

Health Care Consent Act, 1996, S.O. 1996, c. 2, Sched.Nursing Act, 1991 – O. Reg. 275/94 GeneralNursing Act, 1991 – O. Reg. 799/93 Professional MisconductRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991, S.O. 1991, c. 18Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991 – O. Reg. 107/96 Controlled ActsSubstitute Decisions Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c.Patient Restraints Minimization Act, 2001

Nurse Practitioner (Practice Standard)NP Diagnostic and Prescriptive AuthorityNP Practice ResourcesList of Reportable Diseases in Ontario

Note: Applicants writing theRN/RPN Jurisprudence Examinationare encouraged to reviewNP Diagnostic and Prescriptive Authorityand theNurse Practitionerpractice standard to understand an NP’s scope of practice.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: Jurisprudence Examination
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/jurisprudence-examination/frequently-asked-questions-jurisprudence-examinations/
Title: FAQs: Jurisprudence Examination

All applicants to the General, Temporary, Special Assignment or Extended classes must pass the jurisprudence examination that is appropriate for the category and class to which they applied. Current registrants of the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) donothave to take the examination unless they are applying to change their class, for example, if a nurse in the General Class applies to join the Extended Class or if an RPN registrant applies to become an RN registrant. The Examination pass result is valid for five years.

Please note that the jurisprudence examination is the same when applying to become an RN or an RPN. Therefore, if a current RPN registrant wants to become a RN registrant (or vice versa) they will not have to write the examination unless they

have never written it previously, orpreviously wrote it more than five years ago

Yes. All applicants for registration with CNO, including those educated in Ontario, elsewhere in Canada or in other countries are required to pass the jurisprudence examination.

No. Only applicants to CNO, who have submitted their CNO application online and paid the applicant fee, will receive the link to the jurisprudence examination.

You are strongly encouraged to review the laws, regulations and CNO by-laws, practice standards and guidelines that govern the nursing profession in Ontario. It is highly unlikely that applicants can successfully complete the jurisprudence examination without reviewing materials in advance.

There aresample examination questionsto give you an idea of the types of questions you can expect to find on the examination.

CNO has prepared alist of recommended study materials, that help you prepare for the examination. Please note that documents on the resource list may be revised as laws, regulations, by-laws and practice standards and guidelines are updated to reflect changes in nursing practice in Ontario. It will be the responsibility of each applicant to monitor the list for any updates and to ensure they review only the most recent versions of the documents.

CNO has developed a virtual ‘walkthrough’ guide of the online examination, to support applicants. This virtual guide provides a picture of the online learning environment and how to navigate successfully to complete the jurisprudence examination. You are encouraged to review the walkthrough virtual guide before taking the examination.

Applicants are provided with details about how to access the jurisprudence examination as part of the application process. When you submit your CNO application online and pay the application fee, you receive a message and link in yourMaintain Your Membership (MYM)applicant portal, with specific instructions to pay the jurisprudence examination fee. Once payment is received, a follow-up message and link in the MYM portal will give you access to the online examination through a secure website. This is your personal access link and should not be shared with other applicants.

For security reasons, we do not provide a direct link to the testing website from CNO’s website.

Yes. The fee for the jurisprudence examination is $40 (CDN) plus applicable taxes. All fees are in Canadian dollars and are non-refundable. You must pay the fee when you attempt to write the examination. Payment is made online by interac or credit card through a secure payment website. As soon as your payment is processed, you receive an access link on MYM to access the jurisprudence examination.

Applicants will have30 days from the date of log-in to complete the examination. If an applicant is unsuccessful the first time, they have an opportunity to re-attempt the examination within the 30-day period at no additional cost to the applicant. After the 30-day period, the applicants’ access to the online examination expires.

Once you have received instructions about how to access the jurisprudence examination, you can choose to take the online examination whenever you like. You do not have to wait until after you write your registration examination.

However, applicants are responsible for ensuring their exam results are valid at the point of registration. If you pass the jurisprudence exam but do not get registered within the following five years, you will have to write and pass the examination again before you can register with CNO. If you anticipate that it may take you some time to meet any other registration requirements, then you may prefer to meet those requirements first before proceeding with the jurisprudence exam.

No. This examination must be written by you working on your own.

The jurisprudence examination site supports all updated browsers. If one of these browser versions is not installed on your computer, you will see a message inviting you to upgrade when you attempt to access the examination through a secure website.

There is no time restriction for applicants to complete theRN/RPN Jurisprudence Examinationor theRN(EC) Jurisprudence Examination.You will have 30 days from the time you pay the jurisprudence examination fee and log into the online examination to successfully complete it.

You are encouraged to complete the examination at your own pace. The examination allows you to complete it in one sitting or save and return to it at a later time. Upon return, you can begin the examination where you left off.

The new examination requires the completion of an interactive “open-book” e-learning module and a multiple-choice exam. “Open book” examination means that applicants may use online or offline resources, such as, laws, regulations or CNO’s practice standards, while writing the exams.

TheRN/RPN Jurisprudence Examination and the RN (EC) Jurisprudence Examinationconsist of 50 multiple-choice questions each.

Yes. You can save and leave the examination to return at a later time. Your completed answers will be saved.

The jurisprudence examination platform allows you to review your answers by selecting the ‘previous’ or ‘next’ option while taking the examination. At the end of the 50-question examination, you have the option to ‘submit’ your answers. Once your answers are submitted, you have completed your jurisprudence examination. You can close the online examination window and log out of MYM applicant portal.

You can apply for examination accommodation before completing the jurisprudence examination by notifying CNO in writing of your specific circumstances, with a request for alternate arrangements. You may be required to provide supporting documentation with your request. For more information about applying for special accommodation, readRequesting Accommodation.

The examination is scored on a pass/fail basis.

Your examination result will be available in the message centre on your MYM applicant portal. You cannot receive your result by phone or in person at the CNO offices.

The majority of applicants receive their examination result immediately after they submit their test answers. During periodic reviews of the jurisprudence examination process, some applicants’ results are delayed; however, all will receive their results within 24 hours.

It’s recommended you keep a copy of the message with your examination result for your own records.

No. Your jurisprudence examination results will automatically be submitted to CNO.

Yes. If you receive a “fail” result for the jurisprudence examination, you can rewrite the examination. There is no limit on the number of times you can write the examination. You can attempt to write the examination as soon as one hour after you get your result. You will have 30 days from the date of initial log-in to successfully complete the jurisprudence examination.

If you are re-attempting the examination, you are advised to review the learning module chapters before you attempt answering the examination questions.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Requesting accommodation
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/entry-to-practice-examinations/accommodation/
Title: Requesting Accommodation

Everyone who writes an examination as part of their application to CNO has the right to request accommodation.

“Accommodation” can refer to any adjustment made to the testing conditions that helps an applicant overcome the impact of a physical or mental condition/disorder on their ability to write the exam. Examples of accommodation include:

additional timea separate room

If you are considering making a request for accommodation, here are a few things you should know:

Your request for accommodation must be based on a professionally recognized diagnosis of a disability, impairment, condition or disorder (or any other ground listed in theCanadian Charter of Rights and Freedomsor theOntario Human Rights Code).The reason you’re asking for accommodation must be something that would have a clear impact on your ability to write the exam. In other words, you have to show how your condition/disability/disorder would interfere with your ability to write the exam, and how the form of accommodation that you are requesting would address that.The reason you’re asking for accommodation must be current. For example, CNO will not grant your request if you cite a childhood condition that you no longer suffer from.You must submit an Exam Accommodation Request and Supporting Documentationeach timeyou attempt the exam.

Your request for accommodation must ensure the integrity of the examination remains intact.

For CNO to have enough time to review your request for accommodation, please request your accommodation when you apply to CNO by selecting the Accommodation Request option. Submit requests for accommodation and supporting documents to CNObeforeyou contact Pearson VUE to book your writing time. If you schedule your examination before your accommodation is granted, CNO will not be able to grant your accommodation until you cancel your scheduled exam.

To submit a request, send the following to CNO:

a completedExamination Accommodation Request formsupporting information from a health professional(such as a family doctor or psychologist) attesting to the nature and current status of your disability/disorder/condition

There is no fee for making a request for exam accommodation. However, you may be responsible for costs associated with making your request (e.g., assessment fees charged by health professionals, or other costs involved in obtaining your supporting documentation).

Remember:CNO may use any information you submit to support your request for accommodation, to determine whether you suffer from any physical or mental condition or disorder that could affect your ability to practice nursing in a safe manner

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Application & membership fees
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/application-membership-fees/
Title: Application & Membership Fees

All fees (except where noted) are in Canadian dollars and are non-refundable.

Ontario’s Harmonized Sales Tax of 13% is included in each amount. (An exception is the jurisprudence exam, where other taxes may apply). Your payment amount may differ depending on the taxes where you reside.

Please wait until CNO has confirmed exact amounts, as only some fees may apply to you.

Application, registration and services fees can only be paid by credit card. We accept the following credit cards: Visa, MasterCard and American Express.

You can pay your online annual membership renewal fees using credit card, Visa Debit, Mastercard Debit, or a prepaid credit card. Many banks and our payment partners made the decision that they will no longer support INTERAC Online transactions as of Oct. 2023.

In June 2023, Council approved a broad set of fee increases for 2024. CNO increases fees only when necessary to remain financially sustainable and has not increased fees in five years.You can learn more about the fees increase here.

The amount payable for 2023 is in effect until end of day December 31, 2023. The amount payable for 2024 will become effective at the start of day on January 1, 2024.

When you pay your annual renewal fees before December 31, you are renewing your ability to practice nursing for the next calendar year.

Read FAQs about changes to fees

Taxes listed below are based on Ontario tax laws - taxation may vary depending on your place of residence.

Note:Fees shown include Ontario-based taxes.Fees are based on where you received your nursing education, not on your place of birth or your current citizenship status. For example, a Canadian citizen who completes a nursing program at a school outside Canada will pay the same application fees and go through the same application process as other internationally educated nurses.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Fee Increase FAQs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/application-membership-fees/proposed-annual-fees-faq/
Title: Fee Increase FAQs

Nurses pay fees so that CNO can continue its regulatory functions in the public interest, maintaining public confidence and safety, while remaining financially sustainable.

In Ontario, legislation identifies certain professions that are self-regulated to ensure public safety. Nursing is one of these self-regulated professions, along with25 other health care professionsin the province. Members of these professions pay a regulatory body to set and enforce standards and entry requirements.

Paying a fee renews a nurse’s ability to practice in Ontario and makes them a contributor in nursing regulation and public protection. It allows nurses to collectively fulfill the profession’s regulatory mandate to protect the public and ensures the public continues to trust nurses.

In June 2023, Council approved a broad set of fee increases for 2024. CNO increases fees only when necessary to remain financially sustainable and has not increased fees in five years.

A few factors contribute to the increased fees at this time. Those include inflationary pressures, initiatives to support government and health care partner needs and investments to upgrade information technology infrastructure and security.

Despite an aggressive approach to controlling costs, without a fee change, operating costs for regulatory functions in the public interest would increase faster than revenues, eventually leading to annual deficits and we would no longer be able to achieve our mandate of public protection.

What we’ve seen over the past several years is that the public expects more from health care providers and regulators than ever before. CNO must keep pace with changes in the health care and regulatory sectors. Application and renewal fees support the important work of protecting the public by promoting safe nursing practice because they are helping us to:

maintain the registration of approximately 180,000 nurses who were actively practicing in 2023.support innovative programs that respond to system challenges, such as the Supervised Practice Experience Partnership (SPEP), which, to date has matched more than 3,200 applicants with more than 650 employers.reduce barriers and create registration process efficiencies for labour mobility applicants from other Canadian jurisdictions.provide safe and high-quality care to patients by engaging in quality assurance activities that promote self-reflection and life-long learning throughout your careers.increase access to quality care across the province through updates to RN prescribing practice standards, which will allow registered nurses who meet requirements to prescribe certain medications and communicate a diagnosis.maintain the voluntary Nurses’ Health Program for Ontario nurses, designed to encourage them to seek treatment for substance use and/or mental health disorders that may affect their ability to practice nursing safely.

The 2024 renewal fee for nurses in the General and Extended classes is $340. (With HST, the total is $384.20.) The renewal fee for nurses in the Non-Practising class is $63 before taxes. (With HST, the total is $71.19.)

Learn more about the prices forrenewal and application fees.

After accounting for the increase, CNO’s annual fees are still the lowest of any regulated health care profession in Ontario. They are also comparable to, and on the low end of, other nursing regulatory colleges in Canada.

CNO is funded by fees, including renewal fees, to conduct its regulatory functions in the public interest. That includes work like processing applications, providing practice support and customer service, and conducting investigations when necessary. Fees also support initiatives like registration, the Supervised Practice Experience Partnership,modernizing applicant assessmentand transforming theQuality Assurance Program.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Classes of registration
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/
Title: Classes of Registration

A registration class is defined as a group that is based on your nursing education and type of nursing practice.

All nurses registered with CNO belong to one of the following six classes:

Most nurses registered with CNO belong to theGeneral Class. Both Registered Nurses (RNs) and Registered Practical Nurses (RPNs) belong in this class.

Toregisterin the General Class, you must meet all therequirements for registration. This includes showing that you have experience practicing as a nurse within the past three years. This experience is calledEvidence of Practice.

Membership obligations: General ClassApplying to the General ClassMaintain Your MembershipGeneral Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

TheExtended Classis for RNs who have additional education and clinical experience that allows them to practice as Nurse Practitioners (NP). Members in this class have an expanded scope of practice, with the authority to diagnose, prescribe medication, perform procedures, and order and interpret diagnostic tests.

Membership obligations: Extended ClassApplying to the Extended ClassExtended Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

TheNon-Practising Classis for individuals who want to remain registered with CNO at times when they are not practicing nursing in Ontario.

Membership obligations: Non-Practising ClassNon-Practising Class: Questions & AnswersNon-Practising Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

TheTemporary Classis an option for applicants who have met all requirements to register in the General Class, except for the education and registration exam requirements.  Members of this class are allowed to practice under defined terms and conditions. They can join the General Class after they fulfill all the registration requirements including passing the exam.

Membership obligations: Temporary ClassApplying to the Temporary ClassApplication for a Certificate of Registration in the Temporary ClassTemporary Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

TheSpecial Assignment Classis a time-limited registration for nurses who have an appointment as an RN or RPN with an approved facility in Ontario. Individuals in this class can only practice within the scope of their appointment and only under defined terms and conditions.

Membership obligations: Special Assignment ClassSpecial Assignment Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

TheEmergency Classcomes into effect when the provincial government or CNO council determines that it is in the public interest to issue Emergency certificates of registration to qualified nurses.

Emergency ClassEmergency Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: General Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/general-class/
Title: General Class

Most nurses registered with the College belong to theGeneral Class.

Both Registered Nurses and Registered Practical Nurses belong in this class.

Applicants to the General Class must meet all theregistration requirementsbefore they can practise nursing in Ontario.

When practising, members in the General Class must identify themselves by the following:

“Registered Nurse” or “RN” for members registered as RNs“Registered Practical Nurse” or “RPN” for members registered as RPNs.

Every nurse in the General and Extended classes is required to take part in the College’sQuality Assurance Program.

Every year, the College asks all General Class members if they have practised nursing within the past three years.

Members who haven’t practised nursing during that time are asked to transfer to theNon-Practising Classor resign from the College.

Members who hold two certificates of registration (e.g., as an RN and an RPN) must declare recent practice for each certificate.

All General Class members must holdprofessional liability protection(PLP) as set out in the College by-laws. They must produce evidence of PLP whenever the College asks for it.

Every General Class member must tell the Executive Director about any of the following:

a finding of guilt in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea charge in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea finding of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity or any similar finding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdictiona current investigation, inquiry or proceeding for professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity, or any similar investigation or proceeding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdiction.

Also, the member must provide any information requested by the Executive Director under the authority of theNursing Act, 1991, theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those acts or College by-laws.

A General Class member must be one of the following:

a Canadian citizena permanent resident of Canadasomeone authorized under theImmigration and Refugee Protection Act(Canada) to practise nursing in Ontario.

If a member ceases to be any of these, then that member must immediately stop practising and inform the Executive Director in writing.

View the Terms, Conditions and Limitations for the General Class

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: General Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/general-class/general-class-terms-conditions-and-limitations/
Title: General Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

Every General Class certificate of registration is subject to the following terms, conditions and limitations:

The member shall provide to the Executive Director the details of any of the following that relate to the member and occur or arise on or after the day that the member was issued a certificate of registration:

The member shall, at the request of the Executive Director, provide information that is required pursuant to the Nursing Act, 1991, the Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those Acts or the by-laws in the form and manner requested by the Executive Director.

The member shall not engage in the practice of nursing unless the member is a Canadian citizen or permanent resident of Canada or has authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario.

The member shall immediately advise the Executive Director in writing in the event that the member ceases to be a Canadian citizen or permanent resident of Canada or to have authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario. If the member subsequently obtains Canadian citizenship, becomes a permanent resident of Canada or attains authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario, he or she shall immediately advise the Executive Director in writing of that fact.

The member shall maintain professional liability protection in accordance with the requirements, if any, set out in the by-laws.

The member shall, at the request of the Executive Director, provide evidence satisfactory to the Executive Director, and in the form and manner requested by the Executive Director, that the member maintains professional liability protection in accordance with the requirements, if any, set out in the by-laws.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Extended Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/extended-class/
Title: Extended Class

TheExtended Classis for RNs who have additional education and clinical experience that allows them to practise as Nurse Practitioners.

Members in this class have an expanded scope of practice that gives them the authority to diagnose, prescribe medication, perform procedures, and order and interpret diagnostic tests.

The College offers three specialty certificates in the Extended Class:Adult,PaediatricsandPrimary Health Care.

Only nurses in the Extended Class can call themselves Nurse Practitioners.

Applicants to the Extended Class must meet allregistration requirementsfor Nurse Practitioners before they can practise as an NP in Ontario.

When practising, members of the Extended Class must identify themselves using the titles “Registered Nurse (Extended Class),” “RN(EC),” “Nurse Practitioner” or “NP.”

NPs may also use one of the following titles based on the specialty certificate they hold:

NP-AdultNP-PaediatricsNP-Primary Health Care

Every nurse in the General and Extended classes is required to take part in the College’sQuality Assurance Program.

In addition to thepractice standardsthat all College members must follow, NPs are accountable for following theNurse Practitionerpractice standard.

NPs must maintain clinical NP practice to remain in the Extended Class. This clinical practice must include:

direct interaction with the client population(s) consistent with each specialty certificate held by the NPthe use of advanced nursing knowledge and decision-making skill in health assessment, diagnosis and therapeutics in the treatment of those clients.

Each year, NPs must declare if they have practised as an NP within the previous three years. Those who have not are no longer eligible to stay in the Extended Class.

NPs can prescribe controlled substances once they have completed approved controlled substances education and are registered in the Extended Class with the College. You can complete your controlled substances education during the application process or once you are registered as an NP.

Here’s acomplete list of approved NP courses and programsthat integrate controlled substances education.

All Extended Class members must holdprofessional liability protection(PLP) as set out in the College by-laws. They must produce evidence of PLP whenever the College asks for it.

Every Extended Class member must tell the Executive Director about any of the following:

a finding of guilt in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea charge in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea finding of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity or any similar finding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdictiona current investigation, inquiry or proceeding for professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity, or any similar investigation or proceeding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdiction.

Also, the member must provide any information requested by the Executive Director under the authority of theNursing Act, 1991, theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those acts or College by-laws.

An Extended Class member must be one of the following:

a Canadian citizena permanent resident of Canadasomeone authorized under theImmigration and Refugee Protection Act(Canada) to practise nursing in Ontario.

If a member ceases to be any of these, then that member must immediately stop practising and inform the Executive Director in writing.

View the Terms, Conditions and Limitations for the Extended Class

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Extended Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/extended-class/extended-class-terms-conditions-and-limitations/
Title: Extended Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

Every Extended Class certificate of registration is subject to the following terms, conditions and limitations:

The member shall provide to the Executive Director the details of any of the following that relate to the member and occur or arise on or after the day that the member was issued a certificate of registration:

The member shall, at the request of the Executive Director, provide information that is required pursuant to the Nursing Act, 1991, the Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those Acts or the by-laws in the form and manner requested by the Executive Director.

The member shall not engage in the practice of nursing unless the member is a Canadian citizen or permanent resident of Canada or has authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario.

The member shall immediately advise the Executive Director in writing in the event that the member ceases to be a Canadian citizen or permanent resident of Canada or to have authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario. If the member subsequently obtains Canadian citizenship, becomes a permanent resident of Canada or attains authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario, he or she shall immediately advise the Executive Director in writing of that fact.

The member shall maintain professional liability protection in accordance with the requirements, if any, set out in the by-laws.

The member shall, at the request of the Executive Director, provide evidence satisfactory to the Executive Director, and in the form and manner requested by the Executive Director, that the member maintains professional liability protection in accordance with the requirements, if any, set out in the by-laws.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Non-Practising Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/non-practising-class/
Title: Non-Practising Class

TheNon-Practising Classis for registrants who want to keep their membership at times when they are not practicing in Ontario.

The main difference between the Non-Practising Class and the other classes is thatregistrantsin this class cannot practice nursing in Ontario, either paid or unpaid. They also cannot present themselves as qualified to practice nursing anywhere in Ontario.

Registrants in the Non-Practising Class :

pay a reduced annual feedo not take part in CNO’s Quality Assurance Programare not eligible to run for CNO Council, serve on committees, or vote in CNO electionsdo not have to hold professional liability protection.

Registrants can join the Non-Practising Class if they are (or ever have been) a member of the General or Extended Class.

All other certificates of registration (including any specialty certificates) automatically expire when a registrant enters the Non-Practising Class.

It is not mandatory for registrants to join the Non-Practising Class when they retire, leave the nursing profession or choose to practice outside Ontario.

Registrants in the Non-Practising Class can identify themselves by the following:

“Registered Nurse, Non-Practising” or “RN, Non-Practising” in the case of members registered as RNs“Registered Practical Nurse, Non-Practising” or “RPN, Non-Practising” in the case of members registered as RPNs.

Non-Practising Class  registrants can also use their title without the “Non-Practising” qualifier so long as they make it clear at the time they are using their title they are not qualified to practice nursing in Ontario.

Registrants in the Non-Practising Class must not practice nursing in Ontario. A registrant is not in breach of this condition if they are:

engaging in continuing education or remediation as directed by a committee or a panel of a committee of CNO to regain membership in the General or Extended classandmaintainingprofessional liability protectionin line with the requirements, if any, as set out in the by-laws.

Registrants in the Non-Practising Class can apply for reinstatement of their previously held General and/or Extended Class certificate(s). All requirements for reinstatement are non-exemptible.

When applying to return to the General or Extended Class, registrants in the Non-Practising Class must:

not be considered ineligible for reinstatement based on past conductpay all fees required under the by-lawsprovideevidence of practiceas an RN, RPN or NP (as applicable) within three years prior to the date of meeting all other requirements for reinstatement. CNO may extend this timeframe if it is in the interest of public safety.complete either theRN/RPN Jurisprudence ExaminationorRN(EC) Jurisprudence Examinationwithin the five years before they apply for reinstatementshow language proficiency in either English or French (i.e., be able to communicate and comprehend effectively, both orally and in writing) within two years (or such longer period of time approved by the Executive Director).

Every Non-Practising Class registrant must tell the Executive Director about any of the following:

a finding of guilt in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea charge in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea finding of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity or any similar finding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdictiona current investigation, inquiry or proceeding for professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity, or any similar investigation or proceeding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdiction.

Also, the registrant must provide any information requested by the Executive Director under the authority of theNursing Act, 1991, theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those acts or CNO by-laws.

View the Terms, Conditions and Limitations for the Non-Practising Class

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Non-Practising Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/non-practising-class/non-practising-class-terms-conditions-and-limitations/
Title: Non-Practising Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

Every Non-Practising Class certificate of registration is subject to the following terms, conditions and limitations:

The member shall not engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario.

The member shall not be considered in breach of this term, condition, or limitation if:

The member shall not hold himself or herself out as a person qualified to practise in Ontario as a nurse, nurse practitioner, registered nurse, practical nurse, registered practical nurse, or in any speciality of nursing.

The member shall be restricted to the use of the following title:

in the case of a holder of a Non-Practising class certificate of registration as a registered nurse, “Registered Nurse, Non-Practising”, or “RN Non-Practising” orin the case of a holder of a Non-Practising class certificate of registration as a registered practical nurse, “Registered Practical Nurse, Non-Practising” or “RPN Non-Practising.”

The member can also use the RN or RPN title without the “Non-Practising” qualifier so long as they make it clear, at the time they are using their title, that they are not qualified to practise nursing in Ontario.

The member shall provide to the Executive Director the details of any of the following that relate to the member and occur or arise on or after the day that the member was issued a certificate of registration:

The member shall, at the request of the Executive Director, provide information that is required pursuant to the Nursing Act, 1991, the Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those Acts or the by-laws in the form and manner requested by the Executive Director.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Temporary Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/temporary-class/
Title: Temporary Class

TheTemporary Classis an option for applicants to practice nursing while they complete their remaining requirements to register in the General Class.

Registrants in this class practice under defined terms and conditions. They can join the General Class after they fulfill all the registration requirements and pass their exam.

Registrants who have already failed the exam two times or more are not eligible for registration in the Temporary Class.Upon registration in the Temporary Class, Registrants will receive a message from CNO of the date their certificate of registration expires.

Temporary Class registration expires when one of the following events occurs:

The date of expiry is reached, orA second failure of any approved registration exam

Before applying to this class, you are encouraged to review theTemporary Class Learning Moduleon Nursing Regulation as a refresher. This refresher helps applicants understand the legal and ethical issues, as well as the professional accountabilities of the nursing profession in Ontario’s health care system.

To be eligible for the Temporary Class applicants must:

have completed a nursing education program approved or recognized in any jurisdictionshow recentEvidence of Practicesuccessfully complete theJurisprudence Examdemonstrate proficiency inEnglish or Frenchprovide proof that you areauthorized to workin Canadareport anypast offences or findings, anddeclare anyhealth or conduct issuesthat could affect your ability to practicehave an offer of employment from an approved facility listed below:Boards under theEducation ActBoards of Health under theHealth Protection and Promotion ActIndependent Health Facilities under theIndependent Health Facilities ActLong-Term Care Homes under theFixing Long-Term Care Act, 2021Psychiatric Facilities under theMental Health ActHospitals under thePublic Hospitals ActAgencies, Boards and Commissions as defined by the Government of OntarioInstitutions funded by the Minister of Health and Long-Term Care as Community Health Centres (CHCs), Nurse Practitioner-Led Clinics (NPLCs) or Family Health Teams, and physicians funded by Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care primary care alternate payment plan agreementsPost-Secondary Educational Institutions

Applicants must meet all the registration requirements before they enter the General Class. This includes, completing any additional education required to fulfill the nursing education requirement in Ontario and passing the registration exam.

When practicing nursing in the Temporary Class, registrants must identify themselves using the following titles:

“Registered Nurse (Temporary)” or “RN (Temp)” in the case of members registered as RNs“Registered Practical Nurse (Temporary)” or “RPN (Temp)” in the case of members registered as RPNs.

All Temporary Class registrants must holdprofessional liability protection(PLP) as set out in CNO’s by-laws. They must produce evidence of PLP whenever CNO asks for it.

Temporary Class registrants are subject to a series ofterms, conditions and limitations. This includes information on performing controlled acts, member accountabilities and supervision of temporary class members.

Employers must ensure that temporary class registrants are monitored and directed by a member of CNO’s General or Extended Class and that they practice in accordance to these terms.

View the Terms, Conditions and Limitations for the Temporary Class

Every Temporary Class member must tell the Executive Director about any of the following:

a finding of guilt in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea charge in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea finding of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity or any similar finding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdictiona current investigation, inquiry or proceeding for professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity, or any similar investigation or proceeding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdiction.

Also, the member must provide any information that is requested by the Executive Director under the authority of theNursing Act, 1991, theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those acts or College by-laws.

A Temporary Class member must be one of the following:

a Canadian citizena permanent resident of Canadasomeone authorized under theImmigration and Refugee Protection Act(Canada) to practise nursing in Ontario.

If a member ceases to be any of these, then that member must immediately stop practicing and inform the Executive Director in writing.

How to Apply: Temporary ClassTemporary Class Application formTemporary Class Learning Module

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Temporary Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/temporary-class/temporary-class-terms-conditions-and-limitations/
Title: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

Registrants practicing in the Temporary Class must:

In addition, Temporary Class registrants are subject to the following terms and limitations:

Temporary Class registrants cannot perform a controlled act unless the act is ordered by a physician, dentist, midwife, chiropodist, nurse practitioner or RN in the General Class.

Nurses are authorized to do the following controlled acts:

Having the authority to perform a procedure does not automatically mean that it is appropriate to do so. There are a number of factors to consider in determining whether performing a procedure or activity is appropriate(seeScope of Practicefor more information).

Monitoring or directing the practice of Temporary Class registrants  may be direct or indirect depending on:

the registrant's needs in relation to the demands of the patient  population (e.g., the complexity of the patientsthe nature of the required carethe degree of competence of the temporaryregistrant.

The employer is responsible for having sufficient resources to provide direct or indirect monitoring, consultation and collaboration to the registrant. The level of monitoring and directing required will vary according to the registrant’s learning needs, experience, expertise and familiarity with the practice setting.

A Temporary Class registrant is responsible for:

the care they provideidentifying situations where they requiremonitoring or directingidentifying learning needsnegotiating a plan to meet their learning needs.complying with CNO's standards and guidelines, along with the terms, conditions and limitations of their Temporary Class certificate of registration.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Temporary Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/temporary-class/
Title: Temporary Class

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Introduction
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/temporary-class/the-temporary-class/
Title: Introduction

TheTemporary Classis an option for RN or RPN applicants to practice nursing while they are completing their registration requirements for the General Class.

To be eligible for the Temporary Class applicants must:

have completed an approved or recognized nursing education program in any jurisdictionshow recentEvidence of Practicesuccessfully complete theJurisprudence Examdemonstrate proficiency inEnglish or Frenchprovide proof that you areauthorized to workin Canadareport anypast offences or findings, anddeclare anyhealth or conduct issuesthat could affect your ability to practicehave an offer of employment from an approved facility in Ontario listed on theTemporary Class Registration FormTemporary Class registrants are permitted to practice nursing (withterms,conditions and limitations) while completing outstanding education or while waiting for their examination results. They are eligible to join the General Class when they successfully complete the registration exam and meet all other requirements for registration.

Applicants who have already failed the exam two times or more are not eligible for registration in the Temporary Class.

Upon registration in the Temporary Class, registrants will receive a message from CNO of date their certificate of registration expires.

Temporary Class registration expires when one of the following events occurs:

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Applying to the Temporary Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/temporary-class/applying-to-the-temporary-class/
Title: Applying to the Temporary Class

To apply for the Temporary Class, you must first apply to join theGeneral Classand then apply to join the Temporary Class. If you have not already started this process, go toMaintain Your Membershipto create an account and apply online.

Remember:

Applicants who have failed the registration exam two times or more are not eligible to apply to the temporary class.YourTemporary Class registration is only valid for 24 months from date of issue, unless CNO’s Executive Director authorizes an extension.It is your responsibility to complete any outstanding registration requirements including the registration exam for your category (RN or RPN)beforeyour  Temporary Class membership expires. We will send you a message in the applicant portal to let you know the date your Temporary Class registration expires.Under theNursing Act, 1991,applicants have 30 days to complete their General Class registration once they meet all their requirements. CNO will revoke an applicant's Temporary Class certificate of registration if they do not move into the General Class in a timely manner.If you apply for the Temporary Class and your registration is not completed by the time you pass the registration exam,  then your request for temporary registration will not be processed and you will have to complete the application for General Class membership.Registration in the Temporary Class expires if you fail the registration exam twice. CNO will notify you and your employer that your registration has expired and you are no longer permitted to practice nursing in Ontario.  If you fail the registration exam twice while you have an open application, your application will be closed. Please note that application fees are non-refundable.It will take 2 to 3 days to get your criminal record check. However to make sure your application isn’t delayed, it is important that you don’t wait until the end of your application to request your criminal record check.If your Nursing Education requirement is outstanding, employment in Temporary Class may help you meet some competencies after six months.

Temporary Class Offer of EmploymentTemporary Class Learning Module

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Temporary Class FAQs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/temporary-class/faqs-registration-regulation-changes/
Title: Temporary Class FAQs

To be eligible for Temporary Class Registration you must:

meet all requirements for registration in the General Class, except for the education requirement and the registration examhave completed a nursing education program approved or recognized in any jurisdiction, andhave an offer of employment from an approved Ontario nursing employer

You can be registered in the Temporary Class for up to two years. This means, Temporary Class registration will expire two years from the date the certificate of registration is issued.

If you fail the registration exam two times, your registration in the Temporary Class will be revoked, even if it occurs  before the two-year expiry date.

The Temporary Class exists to allow individuals to practice while meeting their outstanding requirements to register in the General Class. To ensure public safety, Temporary Class registrants must, by law, practice underterms, conditions and limitations. Practicing under terms and conditions means that practice restrictions are in place to protect the public. Temporary class registrants are also monitored by a nurse registered with CNO.

By law, Temporary Class registrants must be monitored and directed by a nurse registered with CNO. Employers will have to decide if they have the capacity to support these nurses.

No. The law says that you cannot re-apply to the Temporary Class if you were previously registered in it

No. If you have already failed the exam two times or more, you are not eligible for registration in the temporary class.

Once CNO receives and assesses the required documentation and is satisfied that you meet all Temporary Class Requirements, it will take up to 15 days to process the registration. Employers can confirm an individual’s Temporary Class registration by searching for their name on CNO’s public RegisterFind a Nurse.

CNO’s priority is to register safe and qualified applicants regardless of which Class they are applying to. We do not prioritize the registration of one Class over another.

The fee to apply to the Temporary Class is $56.50. Once CNO determines you are eligible, there is a registration fee of $361.60.  Please visit ourApplication & Membership Feeswebpage for a list of all fees.

No. To be eligible for the Temporary Class, applicants must complete an approved nursing program. This includes nursing students in Ontario.

The time it takes for an Ontario nursing school to collect, approve and submit students’ Verification of Course Completion to CNO varies. While we appreciate students want to be registered as soon as possible, it is important that the Verification of Course Completion is accurate and should not be rushed.

Registration in the Temporary Class is different than participating in theSupervised Practice Experience Partnership Program(SPEP).

SPEP offers applicants the option to complete a supervised practice experience in Ontario, giving them the opportunity to meet the evidence of practice and language proficiency requirements to practice safely in today’s health system.

The Temporary Class is for applicants who have met meet all requirements for registration in the General Class, except for the education requirement and the registration exam.

The table below shows the eligibility requirements for both SPEP and the Temporary Class.

Temporary Class members will also require an offer an employment to be eligible. Whereas applicants for SPEP will be matched with an approved employer.

The government of Ontario is temporarily providing financial supports to cover the costs associated with General Class and Temporary Class registration for internationally educated nurse applicants and former nurses wishing to reinstate their certificates of registration with CNO.

Reimbursements are available to applicants who initiated a General Class or Reinstatement application on or after August 18, 2022, and will cover items such as examinations, applications and registration fees.

Information on eligibility and how to request reimbursement is available throughOntario Health (Health Force).

Monitoring and directing a Temporary Class registrant's practice involves a nurse, who is registered with CNO, working with the Temporary Class registrant to support them in providing safe, competent nursing care and meeting the expected standards of practice. Monitoring and directing practice may be direct or indirect based on the needs of the Temporary Class registrant. This will ensure Temporary Class registrants receive the appropriate teaching, feedback, remediation, guidance, and support to provide safe, competent nursing care. Indirect monitoring means the nurse is readily available for consultation but is not directly at the side of the registrant.

No, RNs in the Temporary Class must be monitored and directed by an RN in the General Class or in the Extended Class (Nurse Practitioner (NP)). However, RPNs in the Temporary Class can be monitored and directed by either an RPN or an RN in the General Class, or an RN in the Extended Class (NP).

Yes, Temporary Class registrants can move to a different employer. However, CNO must  receive and approve the offer of employment from the new employer before you start working.

Yes, Temporary Class registrants can have more than one employer. CNO must receive and approve each offer of employment before you start working.

Temporary Class registrants employed for at least six months may meet some competency gaps. Your employer must fill out aVerification of Nursing Practiceform and submit it to CNO for consideration.

Applicants identified as not having equivalent education have a number of options to meet education equivalency. More information can be found oncompleting additional education.

"Equivalent"means you received an education that provided you with the nursing knowledge, skill and judgment comparable to a current graduate from an approved nursing program in Ontario.

CNO does not share outstanding education needs of registrants to employers.  Temporary Class registrants are not obligated to share with employers their outstanding educational needs, but may choose to do so.

Yes. An unsuccessful attempt of the RNCCAP  does not impact your eligibility for Temporary Class.

Yes, NNAS is the first step in an IENs application journey. NNAS works with CNO to validate education and identify outstanding competency needs to meet the education equivalency requirement.

If you meet all registration requirements for the Temporary Class, you are eligible for registration.

Eligible applicants for the Temporary Class will receive an e-mail from CNO. Employers can ask an applicant to share this e-mail with them as part of the hiring process.

Yes, a Temporary Class registrant can implement a medical directive if they have the knowledge, skill and judgement to do so. A medical directive is a type of order for several patients when specific conditions are met and when specific circumstances exist. See CNO’s practice guidelineAuthorizing Mechanisms.

No, Temporary Class registrants cannot monitor or direct the practice of another nurse in any category or class. Therefore, it is not appropriate for a Temporary Class registrant to be “in-charge” or act in a formal supervisory or leadership role.

This does not prevent a Temporary Class registrant from learning the elements of an “in-charge” role, as long as they are supported by a mentor/preceptor or a designated resource nurse. For example, a Temporary Class registrant could supervise the care provided by UCPs as part of a collaborative practice model, but should not be left as the only Charge Nurse or Director of Care in a practice setting.

No. Temporary Class registration does not grant eligibility for the Registration Exam. To be eligible to write the Registration Exam, you must meet the Nursing Education requirement . Check the Applicant Portal to see whether you have met the Nursing Education requirement. If you have not, you can continue to work toward meeting this requirement by completing the education recommended by CNO while registered in the Temporary Class.  Please note, CNO sends a message to applicants once they become eligible to write the exam.

Under theNursing Act, 1991, you have 30 days to complete your General Class registration after you meet all of the requirements. CNO will revoke your Temporary Class certificate of registration if you do not move into the General Class in a timely manner.

No, we cannot recommend an employer. However, applicants can refer toSchedule 1on our website that includes hyperlinks to Ministry sites containing lists of employer/facility names. This page can be shared with prospective employers who may be unfamiliar with temporary class registration. Ontario Health also offersTemporary Class employment supportsfor RN and RPN applicants.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Information for organizations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/temporary-class/information-for-employers/
Title: Information for organizations

The following information is for organizations interested in providing employment to applicants applying to register in the Temporary Class.

Temporary Class registrants are permitted to practice nursing (withterms, conditions and limitations) while completing their registration requirements for the General Class.

Applicants applying for a Temporary Class Certificate of Registration must have an offer of employment from an approved facility in Ontario.

Read theTemporary Class Guidefor more details about an applicant’s eligibility requirements and the terms, conditions and limitations to practice in the Temporary Class.

CNO accepts offers of employment from the following organizations described as a facility in Schedule 1 (Ontario Regulation 275/94) of theNursing Act, 1991. To see a list of approved organizations as described in Schedule 1, please refer to the list at the end of this webpage.

Organizations not part of Schedule 1 are assessed for approval by CNO as part of the Temporary Class application process submitted by applicants.  To be considered for approval, organizations must:

Provide direct client care servicesProvide formal orientation for registrants (e.g. in relation to policies and procedures, use of electronic health records)Ensure registrants are monitored and directed by at least one nurse registered in CNO’s General Class or Extended ClassSupport the registrant’s integration of CNO’s standards of practice into their careSupport registrants in gaining nursing knowledge, skill and judgment, for example Entry-to-practice competenciesTake an individualized approach to onboarding, considering individual learning needs and nursing knowledge, skill and judgmentBe aware of theterms, conditions and limitationsset out for the Temporary ClassUnderstand theirreporting obligations

CNO does not approve staffing agencies because they do not provide direct client services.

CNO also doesn’t approve practice settings where the types of services may impact public safety and the registrant’s ability to practice competently and safely.

If an organization is not approved, applicants can request a review by CNO’s Registration Committee for approval or obtain an offer of employment from another organization.  CNO will advise the applicant of why an offer of employment may not be accepted.

The practice of a Temporary Class registrant must be monitored and directed by at least one nurse registered in CNO’s General Class or Extended Class and employed by the organization. The nurse acts as a resource, role model, mentor and coach for the Temporary Class registrant.

Monitoring and directing practice may be direct or indirect depending on:

The needs of the Temporary Class registrant in relation to the demand of the patient population (e.g., the complexity of the patients)The nature of the required careThe degree of competence of the temporary registrant, including their learning needs and experience.

Nurses monitoring and directing a Temporary Class registrant’s practice must:

hold a current RPN, RN and/or NP Certificate of Registration in the General Class or Extended Class with CNOunderstand the terms, limitations, and conditions[BT1]placed on a Temporary Class registrant’s practicehave practice experience and understand what is required to monitor and direct a Temporary Class registrantsupport Temporary Class registrants in receiving required training, feedback, remediation, and guidance considering their individual learning needsbe readily available to consult with and support the Temporary Class registrant as needednot be the subject of any inquiries, investigations, or proceedings with CNO or have an open file with the CNO’s Quality Assurance Program.  Employers are encouraged to confirm the status of any nurse, who may be responsible for monitoring and directing a Temporary Class registrant’s practice, on CNO’s public Register on Find a Nurse.

Please note Temporary Class RPN registrant’s practices can be monitored and directedby  a qualified RPN, RN or NP, whereas a Temporary Class RN registrant’s practice  can only be monitored and directed  by either a qualified RN or NP.

Organizations and nurses involved in working with and supporting Temporary Class registrants may find helpful information in CNO’sSupporting Learners online resource.

Temporary Class registrants with an outstanding Nursing Education requirement may meet some competencies through their employment after six months. Organizations may be asked to complete a Verification of Nursing Practice form by the Temporary Class registrant to submit to CNO.

CNO accepts offers of employment from the following organizations described in Schedule 1 (Ontario Regulation 275/94) of theNursing Act, 1991:

Boards under theEducationActBoards of Health under theHealthProtectionandPromotion ActIndependent Health Facilities under theIndependentHealthFacilitiesActLong-Term Care Homes under theFixingLong-TermCare Act, 2021Psychiatric Facilities under theMentalHealthActHospitals under thePublicHospitalsActInstitutions funded by the Minister of Health and Long-Term Care as:Community Health CentresNurse Practitioner-Led ClinicsFamily Health TeamsPhysicians funded by Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care primary care alternate payment plan agreements (AAPA) through direct confirmation by the AAPAAgencies, Boards and Commissions as defined by the Government of OntarioPost-secondary educational institutionsOntario collegesOntario universitiesOntario private career collegesOntario private post-secondary schoolsOntario Indigenous institutesOntario French language institutions

Organizations not part of Schedule 1 can refer to the section called Organization Considerations on this web page for details on what’s needed to be considered for approval.

In reviewing offers of employer from Retirement Homes, CNO refers to theRetirement Homes Regulatory Authorityto ensure that homes are licensed underRetirement Homes Act, 2010.

In reviewing offers of employer from Home Care and Community Care Service organizations, CNO refers toHome and Community Care support Servicesand other relevant websites to confirm information about home ad community care organizations providing services under theHome Care and Community Services Act, 1994.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Competencies met through Temporary Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/temporary-class/competencies-temporary-class/
Title: Entry-to-practice  competencies met through Temporary Class employment

Temporary Class registrants with an outstanding Nursing Education  requirement may meet some entry-to-practice competencies by being employed for at least six months in Ontario.

Depending on your Competency Assessment Form, employment in the Temporary Class may help you meet some competency gaps. Only a small subset of competencies can be considered because of the Terms, Conditions and Limitations on a Temporary Class Certificate of Registration. Your competency gaps may also be met by completingadditional education.

To have your Temporary Class employment considered towards meeting these competencies, you must ask your Temporary Class employer to complete aVerification of Nursing Practice Formand submit it to CNO.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nurse Practitioner
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/nurse-practitioner/
Title: Nurse Practitioner

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Introduction
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/nurse-practitioner/ontario13/
Title: Introduction

Welcome to CNO’s guide to registration for Nurse Practitioners.

The information in this section is intended for individuals who are seeking to enter CNO’sExtended Classand practice as a Nurse Practitioner (NP) in Ontario, who are:

Ontario or Canadian NP graduatesInternationally educated NPsIndividuals currently registered as a practicing NP in another Canadian jurisdiction or territory

Please return to theHow to Applyhomepage if you are looking for information on becoming a Registered Nurse or Registered Practical Nurse in Ontario.

This guide breaks down the registration process, emphasizing the requirements all NPs must meet and the steps required for registration in the Extended Class.

We have made every effort to ensure the accuracy of this information, but pleasecontact CNOif you have any questions or discover an error in this guide.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practising as an NP in Ontario
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/nurse-practitioner/practising-an-an-np-in-ontario/
Title: Practising as an NP in Ontario

To practice as an NP in Ontario, you must be a member of the College’sExtended Class.

Onlymembers of the Extended Class are permitted to call themselves “Nurse Practitioners” (NPs) and practice as NPs within the province.

In Ontario, there are three specialty certificates available to NPs:

Primary Health CarePaediatricsAdult

Find more about thestandards of NP practice, as well as a list of standards that all nurses in Ontario must follow, inStandards & Guidelines.

NPs can prescribe controlled substances once they have completed approved controlled substances education and are registered in the Extended Class with the College. You can complete your controlled substances education during the application process or once you are registered as an NP.

Here’s acomplete list of approved NP courses and programsthat integrate controlled substances education.

The College will notify you if you are required to completed controlled substance education.  If you do not complete the controlled substances education by the time you register with the College, you won't be authorized to prescribe controlled substances as an NP. Your profile onFind a Nursewill state: “Entitled to practice. Cannot prescribe controlled substances until specialized education is completed.” We will also notify any employer we have on record about your status on Find a Nurse.





------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Beginning the Application Process
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/nurse-practitioner/beginning-the-application-process/
Title: Beginning the Application Process - Nurse Practitioner

Applying to the CNO is now an online process.

The application process for NP applicants begins when youcreate an online applicationwith CNO.

There are also verification forms that must be forwarded to the appropriate third party (employers, universities, regulatory bodies, etc.) and returned by those third parties to CNO. CNO must receive all documents from third parties directly from the source. Third-party information submitted by the applicant will not be considered.

For nurses already registered in another province or territory, this process is different. Please refer tothis section of the guidefor more information.

When applying online, you will be asked to provide information, such as:

a summary of all nursing education, including specific details about NP program(s)a summary of your registration in all jurisdictions in which you are practising or have practised nursinga summary of all employment positions as an NP since graduating from your NP program(s), if any.

During your application, if you answer “yes” to any question on the declaration, CNO will require you to provide additional information with your application, including a personal statement and supporting documentation separately. These cannot be submitted online. This information will be reviewed by CNO’s Executive Director and may be referred to the Registration Committee, which will extend the time it takes to process your application.

CNO will begin processing your application when it receives your completed application and all required fees. The application fee is non-refundable.

It is your responsibility to ensure the timely delivery of all required documentation and other information requested by CNO.

Factors that may delay an applicant’s registration include:

graduating from a program that doesn’t meet entry-to-practice competenciesfailing to provideevidence of having practised nursingor graduated from a nursing program within the past three yearsfailing to provide evidence that demonstrateslanguage proficiency in either English or Frenchthe time needed to translate official documentstranslate official documentsinto either English or Frenchfailing to successfully complete the requiredregistration examinationorjurisprudence examinationinformation about the applicant’sconduct, competence or healththat may require further review and follow-up.failing to produce other documents requested by CNO.

Remember:

You may photocopy any of the verification forms as necessaryWhile you can submit yourproof of citizenship, residency status, or authorization to practice nursing in Ontariodocumentation at any time during the online application process, it is recommended you submit this documentation with your application. If you do not submit them during your initial online application, you will need to send them to the CNO separately.Incomplete or missing information may delay the processing of your application.All applications for registration are confidential. Information about your application will be shared with only you unless you provide written permission to release the information to a third party (i.e., an employer, spouse, agency or lawyer). To release information to a third party, you must send us a written and signed letter of permission or complete theAuthorization to Release Informationform.Making a false or misleading statement or representation on your application or supporting documents may result in the cancellation of your application for registration and/or cancellation of any certificates that may be issued.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration Requirements
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/nurse-practitioner/registration-requirements-for-nps/
Title: Registration Requirements

During the application process, CNO assesses all NP applicants to determine whether they meet the following registration requirements.

If CNO finds that you do not meet one or more of these requirements, then you may be asked to provide more information or do something (such as complete an evaluation or additional education) that allows you to meet those requirements.

You have the right torequest a review of your applicationif you want to appeal any decision made by CNO staff or the Registration Committee concerning your application.

SeeRegistration Requirementsfor further information about each of these requirements.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Registration requirements for registered Canadian NPs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/nurse-practitioner/registration-requirements-for-registered-canadian-nps/
Title: Registration requirements for registered Canadian NPs

TheOntario Labour Mobility Act(OLMA) supports full labour mobility for Canadian nurses who wish to practice in Ontario, if they can demonstrate they are registered to practice as an NP in good standing.  Good standing means the applicant:

is not the subject of any discipline or fitness to practice order or of any proceeding, ongoing investigation, interim order or agreement as a result of a complaint, investigation or proceeding; andis complying with the continuing competency and quality assurance requirements where they are currently registered to practice in Canada

Applicants must provide, from each Canadian nursing regulatory body with which they hold an equivalent certificate of registration, a certificate or letter confirming that they are in good standing as a nurse. This includes confirmation that the applicant is registered and is permitted to practice nursing in that province or territory. In doing so, CNO recognizes the Education, Exam, and Language Proficiency registration requirements as being met with some exceptions.

NPs, who are currently registered elsewhere in Canada, must also meet the following requirements to register in Ontario:

Provide evidence of practice in a clinical role as an NP in their specialty within the past three years unless the applicant completed their NP program within the past three yearsSuccessfully complete CNO’s Jurisprudence ExaminationProvide proof of citizenshipProvide a police criminal record checkDeclare any past offenses or findings related to the practice of nursing or another profession, or are involved in certain proceedingsDeclare whether you suffer from any physical or mental condition or disorder that could affect your ability to practice nursing in a safe manner. CNO must also be satisfied that you will practice with decency, honesty and integrity, and in accordance with the law.

By having equivalent Canadian registration, NP applicants are not required to undergo any material additional training, experience, examinations, or assessment to register with the CNO.

This applies to all NPs who are registered to practice in a Canadian jurisdiction outside of Ontario, no matter where they received their nursing education.

CNO recognizes that obtaining third party information may be a barrier to timely registration. As such, eligible applicants currently registered in another Canadian jurisdiction will receive options through the applicant portal to expedite the registration process. These include:

Applicants who are not recent graduates, must provide details about their most recent practice by completing aSupplementary Information formonline. CNO may contact the most recent nursing employer to confirm details about employment and NP practice.Applicants can choose to sign an Agreement and Undertaking instead of waiting for the Verification of Registration to be completed by their current Canadian regulator(s). Through this Agreement and Undertaking, applicants will:declare that their status as a current practising registrant in another Canadian jurisdiction(s) is in good standing, which includes information about discipline or fitness to practice orders, regulatory proceedings, investigations, complaints, , interim orders or agreements, and compliance with continuing competence and quality assurance; andagree to arrange for the required Verification of Registration(s) to be submitted directly to CNO within 30 days of registration.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Examinations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/nurse-practitioner/examinations/
Title: Examinations - Nurse Practitioner

All applicants to the Extended Class must take the NP registration examination approved by Council for the requested NP specialty certificate as either Primary Health Care, Adult or Paediatric.

After CNO has established your eligibility to write yourNP registration examination, you will receive a message through theonline portal.

NPs currently registered to practice in another Canadian jurisdiction who wish to practice in Ontario are not required to write a registration examination to register with CNO. Please refer tothis section of the registration guidefor more detail.

In addition to a registration exam, all NP applicants must successfully complete a separatejurisprudence examination. This exam is designed to evaluate each applicant’s knowledge and understanding of the laws, regulations, and CNO by-laws, practice standards and guidelines that govern the nursing profession in Ontario.The RN(EC) Jurisprudence Examinationincludes questions applicable to all nurses in addition to questions that are unique to NP practice.

The examination is completed online and can be accessed at any time by applicants. Once you have submitted your online application and fee, you will receive information about how to access the secure testing site.

You must provide an email address to CNO to receive information about your jurisprudence exam. This email address must be unique to you (i.e., it cannot be a shared address with other applicants to the CNO).

Visit ourExaminationssection for more about the registration and jurisprudence exams, including fees, refund policies and special accommodation requests.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Initial Registration
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/nurse-practitioner/initial-registration/
Title: Initial Registration - Nurse Practitioner

Registering with the College is now an online process.

When you have successfully met all registration requirements, you cancomplete your registration online and pay the applicable fee.

Once you have completed your registration, then you can confirm your registered status by going toFind a Nurse, the College’s online register, and searching for your name.

Remember:

If the name on any of your supporting documents is different from the name appearing on your application, then please send a photocopy of your birth certificate, marriage certificate, divorce decree or legal name change along with a letter requesting a name change.If during the application process the College receives any information that could affect your ability to practise nursing, the College will review the information and may extend the time needed to process your application.Your application with the College will remain open as long as there is evidence of progress towards meeting registration requirements. If there has been no activity on your application for two years, then the College will consider the application closed. Once that occurs, you will need to submit a new application along with fees and documentation if you wish to register with the College.Note that criminal record checks are only valid for six months from date of issue, so if a previously submitted criminal record check has expired, you will need to apply for and submit a new one.

If I become eligible for registration near the end of the year and I want to register before the end of the year, will I have to pay two fees – one for this year and one for the next year?

It is your choice whether to register with the College this year or next year. The annual fee expires on December 31 every year and it is not pro-rated. This means that if you choose to become registered to practice for the remainder of this year, then you will need to pay the registration fee for this year and then pay another fee to renew your registration for the next year by December 31 of this year.

If you plan to register next year, all requirements for registration must still be met at the time of your registration. You must register before any requirements expire.The College cannot reverse your registration once it has been issued.If you do plan on practicing nursing this year, you must first register with the College, no matter how short the timeframe.

Do you have any other questions about your examinations or the registration process?Contact the College.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Reinstatement
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/
Title: Reinstatement

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Introduction
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/ontario14/
Title: Introduction

Reinstatement requests fall into one of three categories:

1. Reinstatement following a member’s certificate being expired or resigned.

The most common type of reinstatement requests comes from former members who wish to re-enter the College by reinstating  previously held certificatesorcurrent members who hold a certificate in one category (RN or RPN) and want to reinstate a previously held certificate in another category.

2. Reinstatement from the Non-Practising Class to the General or Extended classes.

This is the process by which members in the College’s Non-Practising Class can return to practice by reinstating their membership in the General or Extended Class.

If you are a nurse in the Non-Practising class who desires to return to practice after being away from practice for more than three years but less than eight years, theSupervised Practice Experience (SPE)may be a great option for you.

3. Reinstatement from the General Class to the Extended Class.

This is the process by which current General Class members who left the Extended Class can return to that class and resume practising as NPs.

Next: Reinstatement Requirements

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Reinstatement Requirements
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/reinstatement-requirements/
Title: Reinstatement Requirements

In general, the following requirements must be met for each type of reinstatement regardless of how long you have been out of practice. Applicants who do not meet the reinstatement requirements can requesta review of their applicationby the Registration Committee.

1. Submit an application

To begin the reinstatement process, former registrants must apply by submitting an application to CNO. Applicants have three years, starting from the date their CNO membership ended, to request reinstatement. CNO will consider applications from individuals who have been out of practice for longer than three years if they meet the requirements that show they are competent and safe to practice.

2. Correct deficiencies resulting in a registrant’s certificate becoming expiredThis refers to paying any outstanding fees, submitting any outstanding information, or correcting any other factors that led to the expiration of the certificate of registration.

3. Evidence of practice

The applicant must show evidence of recent practice within three years prior to the date of meeting all other requirements for the reinstatement of the requested certificate. This timeframe may be extended by CNO if the applicant qualifies.

There are several ways to meet theEvidence of Practicerequirement:

Participating in theSupervised Practice Experience PartnershipprogramParticipating in aSupervised Practice ExperienceTaking a refresher coursePracticing in the jurisdiction where you are registered, andApplying for CNO’s consideration to determine if you qualify for an extension of the three-year period.

4. Payment of applicable reinstatement fees

5. Eligibility for reinstatement

When assessing applications for reinstatement, CNO will consider individual factors related to competence and safety of applicants who previously practiced in Ontario. Applicants will also have to show CNO that they have experience practicing.

An applicant is ineligible for reinstatement if, after being a registrant, they were:

found guilty of any criminal offence in any jurisdiction or of any offence involving the use, possession or sale of drugs in any jurisdictionfound guilty of any offence related to the practice of nursing or any other professionthe subject of an inquiry or investigation by the Executive Director that was not completed at the time the applicant stopped being a registrant or that resulted in the registrant’s resignationstill the subject of an outstanding order of a Committee or of a panel of a Committee or a Board of Inquiry with CNOin breach of an order of a Committee or of a panel of a Committee or a Board of Inquiry of CNOin breach of any written agreement with or undertaking provided to CNOrefused registration in nursing or any other profession in any jurisdictionthe subject of a finding of professional negligence or malpractice in any jurisdiction in relation to nursing or any other professionordered to undergo an assessment or reassessment, or to undergo any continuing education or remedial program, under CNO’s Quality Assurance Program that was not completed before they stopped being a registrant

1. Evidence of practice

The applicant must provideevidence of clinicalNP practice (as defined below for each requested specialty certificate) within three years prior to the date of meeting all other requirements for the reinstatement of the Extended Class certificate for the requested specialty. Clinical NP practice from outside of Ontario will be considered.

Clinical NP practice must include:

direct interaction with the patient population(s) appropriate for each requested specialty certificateandthe use of advanced nursing knowledge and decision-making skill in health assessment, diagnosis and therapeutics in the treatment of those clients.

2. Jurisprudence examination

The applicant must successfully complete, within the five years prior to the date on which the member satisfied all the other requirements for reinstatement, theRN(EC) Jurisprudence Exam.

3. Payment of applicable reinstatement fees

Next: Applying for Reinstatement

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Applying for Reinstatement
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/applying-for-reinstatement/
Title: Applying for Reinstatement

All requests for reinstatement begin with the registrant or former registrantcontacting CNO to request the application forms.

Once we receive the request, we will send you  forms to begin the reinstatement process.

This isn't an immediate process. Please allow time for us to process your application. The time it takes to complete the reinstatement process will vary depending on your individual circumstances. Factors that may affect the length of time it takes to be reinstated include:

the length of time involved in submitting the application forms, fees and third-party verification for evaluation by CNOthe time it takes to resolve the issue(s) that caused the  original certificate to be revoked, expired or resigned, in the case of former  registrants requesting reinstatement to CNO

Once we receive all required forms, application fee and supporting documents that will help us determine if you are eligible for reinstatement, we will send you a written update (within 15 days) about the status of your application in your online account. If we determine that you have met all the requirements for registration, we will then send a message through your online account that you are eligible for registration. You will be asked to complete your reinstatement registration and pay your fee online.

Reinstatement applicants can confirm their reinstated status by going toFind a Nurseand searching under their names or registration numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Returning to Practice
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/returning-to-practice/
Title: Returning to Practice

If you are registered in the Non-Practising class and want to return to practice , a Supervised Practice Experience may be a great option for you.

The Supervised Practice Experience (SPE) is a self-directed option designed by the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) for registrants in the Non-Practising Class who have been away from practice three to eight years . It involves completing a nursing practice experience to meet the evidence of practice requirement needed to register in the General Class and safely return to practice.

Registrants complete the practice experience in an area of their choice with a CNO approved sponsor organization. Sponsor organizations assign a preceptor registered in the appropriate class and category (RPN, RN or NP) to guide the participant.

There is no minimum number of hours required to complete the SPE. The time period is determined by the individual learning needs of the participant. However, the participant must complete it within six months from the date CNO approves their request for an SPE.

Learn more about the requirements and how to apply.

Information for NursesInformation for Sponsor Organizations



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Information for Nurses
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/returning-to-practice/information-for-nurses/
Title: Information for Nurses

The following information is for registrants in the Non-Practising Class interested in participating in a Supervised Practice Experience (SPE) to qualify for reinstatement in the General Class.

To be eligible to participate in a SPE, you must:

be a nurse registered in the Non-Practising Classbe unable to demonstrate recent practice have an open reinstatement application with CNO

Individuals who choose to participate in a SPE for reinstatement purposes are required to reinstate to the General Class. You will need to haveprofessional liability insurance.

If you are not registered in the Non-Practising Class,contact CNOto provide you with the Non-Practising Class application form.

To participate in a SPE, you must first submit an application toenp@cnomail.orgfor approval.

Your SPE application must include the following documents:

Supervised Practice Experience Nurse Information FormSPE Sponsoring Organization, Nurse and Supervisor Agreement Form

Once you submit the agreement form, you must wait for CNO’s approval before you can begin your supervised practice experience.

All applications will be evaluated individually. Past or current conduct and/or health issues may impact your eligibility to participate.

The following are requirements you must meet to complete your SPE:

Obtain CNO’s approval on your applicationObtain professional liability protection according toCNO’s by-laws (By-Law 44.4)Provide anoriginal police criminal record checkissued within the last six monthsContact a potential sponsor organization in Ontario where you would like to complete your SPE and begin making inquiries and arrangements for your practice experienceComplete and submit to CNO theSupervised Practice Experience Nurse Information FormandSPE Sponsoring Organization, Nurse and Supervisor Agreement Formfor review and approvalAssess your learning needs, using the Quality Assurance Program’sSelf-Assessment toolOnce approved, work with a nurse supervisor assigned by the sponsor organizationComplete the SPE within a six-month period following CNO’s approval of your applicationComplete and submit theSupervised Practice Experience Completion Formto CNO

There is no minimum number of hours required to complete the practice experience. The amount of time is determined by your learning needs.

In addition, you are responsible for all expenses, such as costs for textbooks, other learning materials and Non-Practicing Class registration fees.

Throughout your SPE, you must:

clearly explain to others, including patients, the capacity in which you are practicing. For example, stating,“I’m an RN/RPN who has not practiced in the last [x] years. I’m completing a practice experience as part of my requirements to re-enter the nursing profession under the supervision of a qualified supervisor.”use the protected title, “RN, Non-Practicing” or “RPN, Non-Practicing” in formal documentationonly provide care you are competent to provide, including performing any of the five controlled acts authorized to nursing

You must not:

delegate or acceptdelegation of a controlled actsupervise, monitor or direct the performance of others, with no exceptions

You must complete your SPE within a six-month period following CNO’s approval of your application.

Once you complete the SPE, the sponsor organization must submit theSupervised Practice Experience Completion Formto CNO by email toenp@cnomail.org.

CNO will review all information submitted, assess your eligibility for registration in the General Class and contact you about next steps.

If you have questions about participating in a SPE, contact CNO atcno@cnomail.org.

Early in the planning for your SPE, you should find and make arrangements with a sponsor organization in Ontario. It might be helpful to start by contacting your previous employers and local health care organizations.

The practice area you select must enable you to:

apply nursing knowledge, skill and judgmentapply CNO’s practice standards and guidelineshave an impact, whether direct or indirect, on the delivery of health care services to clients

A nurse supervisor, registered as RPN, RN or NP must be available to supervise your practice. Please note that RPNs can be supervised by a qualified supervisor who is either an RPN, RN or NP, whereas RNs can only be supervised by an RN or NP.

Also read:Information for Sponsoring Organization & Supervisor



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Information for Sponsor Organizations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/returning-to-practice/information-for-sponsoring-organization--supervisor/
Title: Information for Sponsor Organizations

The following information is for sponsor organizations interested in providing a Supervised Practice Experience.

The Supervised Practice Experience (SPE) is a self-directed option for nurses registered in the Non-Practising Class to obtain their evidence of practice requirement to requalify for registration in the General Class.

Nurses who choose to participate in a SPE will contact a potential sponsor organization in Ontario and arrange for their practice experience.

Read theSPE pagefor more details about this initiative.

Sponsor organizations who agree to provide a SPE must be approved by CNO and agree to:

complete theSPE Sponsoring Organization, Nurse and Supervisor Agreement Formassign a nurse supervisor to supervise the nurse. The supervisor can be an RPN, RN or NP if the supervised nurse is an RPN. However, RNs can be supervised by either an RN or NP.provide CNO the name of the primary supervising nurse (primary contact)arrange for orientation to inform the nurse of relevant policies, procedures, resource materials as well as the general practice environmentoffer a supervised practice experience appropriate to the nurses’ competence and within their legislated scope of practice. The supervised nurse may perform the five controlled acts authorized to nursing. Read theinformation for nursespage for details of a nurse’s accountabilitiescontact CNO regarding concerns or clarifications when neededreport to CNO if there is reason to believe that the supervised nurse has sexually abused a client, is incompetent or incapacitated. Refer to theReporting Guidefor more informationcomplete documentation to verify completion of the practice experience.

There is no minimum number of hours required to complete the practice experience. This time period is determined by the nurse’s individual learning needs. However, participating nurses must complete it within a six-month period.

When you agree to be a sponsor organization for a nurse’s SPE, you should consider whether Workplace Safety and Insurance Board (WSIB) coverage is required, based on your organization’s policies.

Organizations cannot:

use the supervised nurse to replace its nursing staff

The role of the supervisor is pivotal to the practice experience. The supervisor acts as a resource, role model, mentor/coach, and supervisor. Supervision may be direct or indirect based on the needs of the supervised nurse. Indirect supervision means the supervisor is readily available for consultation but is not directly at the side of the supervised nurse.

The supervisor must:

hold a current RPN, RN and/or NP Certificate of Registration in the General Class or Extended Class with CNOhave a minimum of three consecutive years of nursing practicenot be the subject of any investigations or have an open file with the CNO’s Quality Assurance Programhave sufficient time and resources to take on the responsibility of supervisiondisclose to CNO any pre-existing relationship (e.g., family, social/personal, business) with the supervised nurse that might interfere with their ability to objectively evaluate the supervised nurse

Please note RPN’s can be supervised by either a qualified RPN, RN or NP supervisor, whereas RNs can only be supervised by a qualified RN or NP supervisor.

Multiple supervisors can oversee the practice experience of the participating nurse, but the organization will need to identify a primary supervisor for contact purposes.

Once the SPE ends, the sponsor organization must complete and submit to CNO theSupervised Practice Experience Completion Formtoenp@cnomail.org.

Sponsor organizations and supervisors who have questions or need more information about the SPE should contact CNO’s Monitoring team by phone at 416 928-0900, ext. 7683; Toll-free in Canada at 1 800 387-5526, ext. 7683; by Fax at 416 928-1914; or by email atmonitoring@cnomail.org.

Also read:Information for Nurses

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Frequently Asked Questions
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/returning-to-practice/frequently-asked-questions/
Title: Supervised Practice Experience - FAQ

No. CNO does not specify the number of hours that a nurse must practice to complete the SPE. The time period is determined by the individual nurse, with their sponsoring organization, based on their learning needs and will vary depending on a nurse’s experience, knowledge and skill level. While one nurse may need several weeks to refresh, another nurse may need less or more time.

No, the sponsoring organization is not required to pay. The decision to remunerate is up to the sponsoring organization.

CNO does not assess or approve the learning needs that a nurse has identified for their SPE. Each nurse is responsible for reflecting and determining their own unique learning needs based on a variety of factors, such as experience, education, time in or away from the role, etc.

Each sponsoring organization is responsible for determining whether it is able to support a nurse completing an SPE, including what it may require from the nurse in order to do so – this may include a learning plan.

No. A nurse is responsible for identifying an appropriate organization to meet their learning needs. CNO reviews each SPE application on a case-by-case basis.

Yes, CNO can deny an application. When an application is denied, CNO will inform the nurse about its decision and the reasons.

The decision of an organization to support a nurse’s SPE is voluntary. CNO does not mandate or require any organization to sponsor a nurse’s SPE.

The sponsoring organization is required to confirm that the nurse has completed the requirements of the SPE as outlined in theInformation for Sponsoring Organization & Supervisor. When completing theSupervised Practice Experience Completion Form, if the organization answers “no” to the question about whether they would re-employ the nurse, it should include information about any concerns they have about the nurse’s practice, conduct or health. However, it is CNO’s responsibility to make the determination whether the nurse has met the requirements to reinstate in the General Class.

Nurses can complete SPE’s in a variety of practice settings. Therefore, the sponsoring organization is in the best position to identify the appropriate resources to support the SPE nurse. As a starting point, the resources may look similar to what the sponsoring organization would provide to a new staff member in orientation, but will also depend on the needs of the individual nurse.  If you are looking for resources you can use as a sponsoring organization to help the nurse understand CNO standards and how to apply them to their practice, you may refer to CNO’sStandards & Learning page.

You can read more about what and when to report your concerns to CNO from ourReporting Guide.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Glossary
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/returning-to-practice/glossary/
Title: Glossary

The following are definitions of terms that are used in the Supervised Practice Experience (SPE) Planning Kit. They are defined within the context of the SPE.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Reinstatement regulation changes FAQs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/reinstatement/reinstatement-regulation-changes-faqs/
Title: Reinstatement regulation changes FAQs

CNO recently made changes to Reinstatement regulations. The following FAQs respond to commonly asked questions related to these changes.

What are the changes to the reinstatement requirement?

CNO now has the authority to determine the number of years an applicant can be out of practice before reinstating. Changes to the reinstatement process provide CNO with the flexibility to review each applicant for reinstatement individually to ensure that they are safe and competent to practice. This includes discretion to extend the Evidence of Practice beyond three years.

How will CNO ensure former nurses who are out of practice for more than three years are safe to practice?

Our research shows there are many factors that impact knowledge retention.  For example, the number of years a nurse practices in Ontariobeforetaking leave impacts how long they retain knowledge. When assessing applications for reinstatement, CNO will take individual factors into consideration for applicants who previously practiced in Ontario.  Applicants would also have to show CNO that they have experience practicing.

With this new regulation, will I still need to provide Evidence of Practice for reinstatement?

Yes. All applicants are required to demonstrate Evidence of Practice regardless of how long it has been since you have practiced. Evidence of Practice is a public safety measure to ensure that you can still apply CNO’s standards into practice.

What options do I have to meet Evidence of Practice if mine has expired or if CNO declines my application for an extension?

There are several ways to meet the Evidence of Practice requirement:

Participating in theSupervised Practice Experience PartnershipprogramParticipating in aSupervised Practice ExperienceTaking a refresher coursePracticing in the jurisdiction where you are currently registered

No other options are being considered at this time.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nursing Education Program Approval
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/nursing-education-program-approval/
Title: Nursing Education Program Approval

Nursing Education Program Approval (program approval) is the College of Nurses of Ontario’s (CNO’s) new evaluation and monitoring process for approving all entry-level nursing education programs (Practical Nursing, Baccalaureate Nursing and Nurse Practitioner) in Ontario. This process is one way CNO meets its mandate of protecting the public.

Program approval ensures graduates are prepared to practise nursing safely, competently and ethically for the nursing category and/or class for which they want to register.

CNO’s registration regulation requires that all applicants have graduated from a program approved by CNO’s Council. Making sure this regulatory accountability is consistently and effectively applied to all nursing education programs is fundamental to protecting the public.

You can learn more in theNursing Education Program Approval Policy.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Approved nursing programs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/approved-nursing-programs/
Title: Approved Nursing Programs

The College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) is the regulatory body for nursing in the province. It is not a school.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Baccalaureate Nursing (RN) Programs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/approved-nursing-programs/rn-programs/
Title: Baccalaureate Nursing (RN) Programs

The following baccalaureate nursing programs have been reviewed and approved by Council. All nursing programs are reviewed on an annual basis. Each new program’s curriculum is reviewed prior to admitting students.

Please contact the schools directly if you have any questions about their nursing programs.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Nurse Practitioner (NP) Programs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/approved-nursing-programs/np-programs/
Title: Nurse Practitioner (NP) Programs

The following Nurse Practitioner nursing programs have been reviewed and approved by Council. All nursing programs are reviewed on an annual basis. Each new program's curriculum is reviewed prior to admitting students.

CNO is part of a national collaborative working, with other nurse regulators, towards a new framework for registering NPs in Canada. For more information about the national framework, and to sign up for project updates, please visitwww.ccrnr.ca/npr-fipp.html

Please contact the schools directly if you have any questions about their nursing programs.

The primary health care nurse practitioner programs (PHCNP) was established by the Council of Ontario University Programs in Nursing (COUPN). Nine universities offer this program.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Practical Nursing (PN) Programs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/approved-nursing-programs/practical-nursing-programs-in-ontario/
Title: Practical Nursing (PN) Programs

The following practical nursing programs have been reviewed and approved by Council. All nursing programs are reviewed on an annual basis. Each new program’s curriculum is reviewed prior to admitting students.

Please contact the schools directly if you have any questions about their nursing programs.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: RN Prescribing Education Programs
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/approved-nursing-programs/rn-prescribing-education-programs/
Title: RN Prescribing Education Programs

The following RN Prescribing programs are Council approved.

Please contact the schools directly if you have any questions about their RN prescribing education program.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Education resources and references
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/education-resources-and-references/
Title: Education Resources and References

The purpose of this page is to  provide educators in entry level nursing programs at Colleges and Universities in Ontario the most current information and resources available.

This page will also help everyone stay connected and informed of any changes and/or new developments.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Academic Reference Group
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/education-resources-and-references/academic-reference-group/
Title: Academic Reference Group

The Academic Reference Group is made up of educators and representatives of the College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) who share information and collaborate on nursing regulatory issues of mutual interest and concern.

The goal of the group is to provide an opportunity for discussion and collaboration on regulatory issues of importance to both educators and the College of Nurses of Ontario.

The group includes 12 Ontario nursing educators who have volunteered to represent all nursing programs in the province.

The College of Nurses of Ontario (CNO) values engagement with stakeholders to promote safe nursing practice. Collaboration between Academia and the CNO will enable a common goal to ensure nursing graduates are able to practice safely, competently, and ethically in any Ontario health care context.

The reference group provides one mechanism for CNO and educators to engage, share information and collaborate with each other on strategic and operational matters of mutual interest. Information collected will be used to inform nursing regulation (for example, planning, evaluation etc.), and support nursing educators so they are informed and prepared to support any related changes to nursing regulation.

The Academic Reference Group (ARG) represents all practical nursing (PN), baccalaureate (BN), and nurse practitioner (NP) programs that provide entry level nursing education in Ontario, as well as CNO staff. The ARG allows information sharing and collaboration about regulatory related topics of mutual interest.

The main objectives are to:

Collaborate and share perspectives and experience about strategic and operational matters related to regulation of entry level nursing education and practice.Exchange information and provide input that supports the planning, development, implementation, and evaluation of regulatory and nursing education policies and initiatives.Propose recommendations for consideration related to education program, as applicable.

All reference group members will actively and constructively participate in meeting discussions in a professional manner. The group will be chaired by the CNO Manager Education Program.

The Chair will:                       ­­

Prepare the meeting agenda, supporting materials and report outcomes to CNO.Foster an environment where all feel welcome, respected, and have opportunity to participate.Facilitate an evaluation process.Post Academic Reference Group ‘News to Use’ newsletter on cno.org following each meeting.

All participants will:

Contribute agenda items and prepare for meetings.Identify any conflict of interest.Participate in meeting evaluations.

Participation in the group is voluntary and will be advertised openly.

The desired number of nursing program participants (for example, educators/administrators) for the reference group is 12 (no alternates).

CNO is committed to ensuring a diverse representation of Ontario’s nurses and aims to provide a space where a variety of viewpoints and experiences can be shared related to matters of patient safety and safe nursing practice in Ontario.

The CNO Manager Education Program and Director Professional Practice as well as members of the CNO education team will support the group.

Membership is a three-year term, with an option for a 1-year renewal (staggered to ensure knowledge transfer).

Applicants will be required to provide their application form and will be considered based on criteria outlined below. If applicant is a nurse, member must be in good standing with CNO.

Aggregate characteristics of the group will reflect:

A range of knowledge and experience of nursing education from PN, BN and NP programs.Geographical diversity across provinceLanguage representation (French and English)Administrative and educator (faculty) representationUnique perspectives from diverse members of the academic community

The committee chair will facilitate evaluation and achievement of committee objectives, informally through group discussion at the end of each meeting and formally when annual Terms of Reference and Committee Membership is reviewed.

ARG will meet quarterly by teleconference (using supportive technology, such as Zoom). The chair may call ad hoc meetings as required.

Members are encouraged to share key messages with their colleagues and stakeholder networks. Certain items shared (such as draft documents) may require confidentiality and will be restricted from circulation beyond the ARG until approved for distribution.

ARG will annually review Terms of Reference, updating as required.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Fair Registration Practices Report
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/fair-registration-practices-report/
Title: Fair Registration Practices Report

CNO’s registration practices are regularly audited by theOffice of the Fairness Commissioner(OFC). Created under theFair Access to Regulated Professions Act (2006),this government agency works with regulated professions and compulsory trades in Ontario to ensure they have registration processes that are transparent, objective, impartial and fair.

By law, all regulatory bodies in the province, including the College, must:

provide clear information about registration requirements, processes, timelines and feesmake registration decisions, and provide written reasons for those decisions, within a reasonable timeoffer an internal review or appeal, including an opportunity for applicants to submit arguments and supporting documentsinform applicants of any rights they have to request further review or to appeal the registration decisionconduct assessments in a way that is transparent, objective, impartial and fair, and take reasonable measures to ensure external assessors conduct their own assessments in the same wayensure adequate training of all individuals who assess qualifications or make registration decisionsgrant applicants access to records related to their application, upon written request and within certain legal limitations.

Every year, the College reviews its registration practices and submits aFair Registration Practices Reportto the OFC. In turn, the OFC creates a list of recommendations for the College to put into practice.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Temporary Class webinars
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/temporary-class/temporary-webinars/
Title: Temporary Class webinars

The following webinars provides an overview for applicants and employers on the recent regulation changes to Temporary Class registration.

Visit theFAQs on registration regulation changesfor answers to commonly asked questions.









------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Special Assignment Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/special-assignment-class/
Title: Special Assignment Class

TheSpecial Assignment Classis an option for nurses who have an appointment as an RN or RPN with anapproved facilityin Ontario.

Members in this class can only practise within the scope of their appointment and only under defined terms and conditions (see below).

Applicants to the Special Assignment Class must meet the followingregistration requirementsbefore they can practice nursing in Ontario.

demonstrate successful completion of a nursing education program recognized or approved in the jurisdiction in which the program was taken and designed to prepare them for the type of nursing they want to practice in OntariodemonstrateEvidence of Practiceby showing they have recent practice as a nursesuccessfully complete thejurisprudence examinationshowproficiencyin English or Frenchprovide proof they areauthorized to workin Ontariostate anypast offences, registration refusals in other jurisdictions, findings related to the practice of nursing or another profession against you, or are involved in certain proceedingsdeclare anyhealth conditionsthat could affect your ability to safely practice nursing.

In addition, applicants to the Special Assignment Class must:

have an appointment or special assignment with a facility in Ontario recognized by CNO, or an assignment approved by a panel of the Registration Committeenot have previously been registered as an RN or RPN with CNO except as a member of the Special Assignment or Emergency Assignment classesnot have been previously registered as a Special Assignment member for the same assignment or appointment.

A Special Assignment Class membership expires after exactly one year after the members joins the classorthe date specified on the member’s certificate of registrationorthe last day of the appointment or special assignment, whichever comes first.

When practising, members in the Special Assignment Class must identify themselves by the following:

“Registered Nurse (Special Assignment)” or “RN (Spec. Assign.)” in the case of members registered as RNs“Registered Practical Nurse (Special Assignment)” or “RPN (Spec. Assign.)” in the case of members registered as RPNs.

Every Special Assignment Class member must:

practise only within the scope of the appointment or special assignment and only within the facility named in the certificatebe monitored and directed by a nurse in the General or Extended Classnot perform a controlled or authorized act unless the act is ordered under clause 5 (1) (b) of theNursing Act, 1991, or by an RN in the General Classnot supervise, monitor or direct the performance of a controlled or authorized act or the practice of another nursenot delegate to another nurse or anyone else the authority to perform a controlled or authorized act.

All Special Assignment Class members must holdprofessional liability protection(PLP) as set out in the College by-laws. They must produce evidence of PLP whenever the College asks for it.

Every Special Assignment Class member must tell the Executive Director about any of the following:

a finding of guilt in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea charge in any jurisdiction relating to any offencea finding of professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity or any similar finding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdictiona current investigation, inquiry or proceeding for professional misconduct, incompetence or incapacity, or any similar investigation or proceeding, in relation to the practice of nursing or another profession in any jurisdiction.

Also, the member must provide any information that is requested by the Executive Director under the authority of theNursing Act, 1991, theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those acts or College by-laws.

A Special Assignment Class member must be one of the following:

a Canadian citizena permanent resident of Canadasomeone authorized under theImmigration and Refugee Protection Act(Canada) to practise nursing in Ontario.

If a member ceases to be any of these, then that member must immediately stop practising and inform the Executive Director in writing.

View the Terms, Conditions and Limitations for the Special Assignment Class

showproficiencyin English or French

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Special Assignment Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/special-assignment-class/special-assignment-class-terms-conditions-and-limitations/
Title: Special Assignment Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

Every Special Assignment Class certificate of registration is subject to the following terms, conditions and limitations:

The member shall practise the profession only within the scope of his or her appointment or special assignment and only within the facility named in the certificate.

The member’s practice must be monitored and directed by a member of the College holding a General or Extended class certificate of registration.

The member shall not perform a controlled or authorized act, including one which is delegated to him or her, unless the act is ordered,

The member shall not supervise, monitor or direct the performance of a controlled or authorized act or the practice of another member in any class.

The member shall not delegate to another member or any other person the authority to perform a controlled or authorized act.

The member shall at all times when providing nursing services identify himself or herself as a Special Assignment member.

The member shall be restricted to the use of the following title:

The member shall provide to the Executive Director the details of any of the following that relate to the member and occur or arise on or after the day that the member was issued a certificate of registration:

The member shall, at the request of the Executive Director, provide information that is required pursuant to the Nursing Act, 1991, the Regulated Health Professions Act, 1991, regulations under those Acts or the by-laws in the form and manner requested by the Executive Director.

The member shall not engage in the practice of nursing unless the member is a Canadian citizen or permanent resident of Canada or has authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario.

The member shall immediately advise the Executive Director in writing in the event that the member ceases to be a Canadian citizen or permanent resident of Canada or to have authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario. If the member subsequently obtains Canadian citizenship, becomes a permanent resident of Canada or attains authorization under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (Canada) permitting the member to engage in the practice of nursing in Ontario, he or she shall immediately advise the Executive Director in writing of that fact.

The member shall maintain professional liability protection in accordance with the requirements, if any, set out in the by-laws.

The member shall, at the request of the Executive Director, provide evidence satisfactory to the Executive Director, and in the form and manner requested by the Executive Director, that the member maintains professional liability protection in accordance with the requirements, if any, set out in the by-laws.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Emergency Class
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/emergency-assignment-class/
Title: Emergency Class

TheEmergency Classcomes into effect when the province or CNO Council determines that it is in the public interest to register qualified nurses to address emergency circumstances.

The Emergency Class is authorized for the sole purpose of allowing nurses to assist during an emergency. Nurses can assist in responding in a variety of ways. For example, some nurses registered in the Emergency Class may cover positions vacated by nurses who are redeployed to deal with the emergency.

There is no fee to register in this class.

Emergency Class applicants do not have to meet all the registration requirements. However, they must show CNO that they have:

completed a nursing education program approved or recognized in any jurisdictionpracticed as an RN or RPN (as appropriate) within the three years before the day they are issued an Emergency Class certificate of registrationpassed the nursing Jurisprudence Exam within five years before the day they are issued an Emergency Class certificate of registrationlanguage proficiency in either English or FrenchNot failed the nursing registration examination two timesreport anypast offences or findings, and

declare anyhealth or conduct issuesthat could affect your ability to practice

Emergency Class registrants require supervision and must practice under specific terms, conditions and limitations.For detailed information, read the Terms, Conditions and Limitations for the Emergency Class.

Registrants in the Emergency Class may be eligible to practice as a nurse in Ontario by registering in another practicing class, such as the General Class or Temporary Class.

In some instances, certain registration requirements met to enter the Emergency Class can be carried over to a new application.

Registrants can apply before their Emergency Class registration expires to minimize interruption in their registration.  Learn more about ourRegistration options.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Emergency Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/classes-of-registration/emergency-assignment-class/emergency-assignment-class-terms-conditions-and-limitations/
Title: Emergency Class: Terms, Conditions and Limitations

Every Emergency Class certificate of registration is subject to the following terms, conditions and limitations:

The registrant must be supervised by an RPN, RN or NP registered with CNO.The registrant shall at all times, when providing nursing services, identify themselves as an Emergency registrant.The registrant shall not perform a controlled or authorized act, unless the act is ordered by a Registered Nurse in the General Class or a person authorized to do the procedure under section 5 (1) (b) of theNursing Act, 1991.The registrant shall not supervise, monitor or direct the performance of a controlled act or authorized act or the practice of another registrant in any class.The registrant shall not delegate or accept the delegation of a controlled or authorized act from another registrant or any other person.The registrant shall be restricted to the use of the following title:in the case of a registrant holding an Emergency certificate of registration as a registered nurse, “Registered Nurse (Emergency), orin the case of a registrant holding an Emergency certificate of registration as a registered practical nurse, “Registered Practical Nurse (Emergency)”

The registrant shall maintain professional liability protection (PLP) in accordance with the requirements, if any, set out in the by-laws.

The registrant shall, at the request of the Executive Director, provide evidence satisfactory to the Executive Director, and in the form and manner requested by the Executive Director, that the registrant maintains PLP in accordance with the requirements, if any, set out in the by-laws.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Translation of Documents
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/translation-of-application-documents/
Title: Translation of Documents

All documents submitted to the College as part of the application processmustbe in either English or French. This includes documents that come to the College directly from the official source (e.g., course transcripts should come to the College directly from the school that offered the program of study in question).

In instances where the College receives documents from official sources that are not in English or French, the College will send copies of the document(s) in question to the applicant, who will then be responsible for arranging translation of the document(s) by an approved translator.

When the College receives an original document in a language other than English or French, it will provide the applicant with a copy of that document for translation.

The applicant may then choose one of several options: request a translated copy from the official source that created the document; request a translation from a consulate, high commission or embassy; or have the document translated by an accredited translator.

In some instances, the official source (e.g., a school, an employer or a health regulatory body) may be able to provide applicants with translated copies of the document in question. If that is the case, please ensure the source sends the translated document directly to the College.

The College also accepts translations from:

the consulate, high commission or embassy (in Canada) of the country that issued the document(s)a Canadian consulate, high commission or embassy in the country from which the document(s) originated

If it is not possible to receive a translated copy of the document from the official source or a government body, the College will accept documents translated by certified translators.

All translations must be accompanied by an original statement from the translator that affirms:

the translation is accurate and authenticthe translator is an accredited member of a provincial association, society or corporationthe identification number and/or seal, name, address and telephone number of the translatorthe printed name and original signature of the translator

After the translation is completed, the applicant must then arrange to have the translated document sent back to the College by the translator.

TheCanadian Translators, Terminologists and Interpreters Council (CTTIC)provides links to translators who are certified through a provincial association or other organization that is a member of CTTIC. To find an accredited translator, contact the specific provincial association or organization directly.

For those requiring translation services in Quebec, contact theOrdre des traducteurs, terminologues et interprètes agréés du Québec (OTTIAQ)to find an accredited translator.

When you contact the provincial association/organization that certifies the translator, make sure to confirm the translator is certified to translate into English or French from the original language of the document. The College will not accept translations completed by candidates for certification.

Remember:The College does not return documents it receives as part of the application process, so remember to keep copies of all documents that you submit as part of your application.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Documents from official source
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/documents-from-official-source/
Title: Documents from official source

When applying to the College, you are required to obtain certain documents relating to your nursing education, practice, registration and other requirements from official sources such as schools, employers, or regulatory boards. These could be documents such as:

Verification of Course Completion forms, transcripts or course descriptions from the educational institution or school where you were educatedVerification of Nursing Practice forms, job descriptions or letters of reference from nursing employersVerification of Registration forms from a nursing regulatory authority.

There may be circumstances that make it impossible to arrange for documents to be sent to the College directly from the official source. For example, the source could have experienced a natural disaster at their facility, or it could have closed down for other reasons.  Also, your personal circumstances, such as being a refugee, may make it challenging for you to obtain the document.

If you are unable to obtain the required documentation,send an emailor aletter to the Collegeand we will tell you what you will need to do to proceed with your application.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Further Resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/become-a-nurse/new-applicants1/outside-canada/further-resources/
Title: Further Resources

To learn more about nursing education in Ontario, the province’s health care system, or how to access programs and services designed to help newcomers, please visit one of the following sites:

Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing /Association canadienne des écoles de sciences infirmièresThe national voice for nursing education and nursing research in Canada.

CARE  - Centre  for Internationally Educated NursesAn organization to help internationally educated nurses gain the knowledge and experience needed to pass the registration exam and practice nursing safely and confidently in Ontario.

HealthForceOntario.caHelps internationally educated health care professionals prepare for practice in Ontario. Knowledgeable advisors work one on one to review your experience, explain steps to qualification and assess your opportunities.

Hamilton Health Sciences' Internationally Educated Nurse Integration ProjectOverview of the Community Collaboration Employment Model (CCEM), which was developed to support IENs integrating into the Canadian healthcare system when they are close to having their registration as RNs/RPN. It is currently funded by the Ministry of Labour, Training and Skills Development.

Occupation-Specific Language TrainingGovernment-funded courses, available for free at select Ontario colleges, that are designed to help health-care professionals improve their language and workplace culture skills.

Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term CareResponsible for administering the health care system and providing services to the Ontario public.

Ontario Ministry of LabourAdvances safe, fair and harmonious workplace practices that are essential to the social and economic well-being of the people of Ontario.

Settlement.orgProvides information and resources for newcomers to Ontario.

Supervised Practice Experience Partnership

The Supervised Practice Experience Partnership (the program) is a partnership program between CNO, Ontario Health and CNO approved organizations. The program offers applicants the option to complete a supervised practice experience in Ontario.

Working in Ontario: NursingInformation provided by the Government of Ontario for internationally educated nurses who wish to practise in Ontario.

Some Ontario community colleges provide opportunities for nurses to update their nursing education. These programs may be available to applicants who need to update their practice in order to meet theevidence of practice requirementfor registration.

Contact anapproved nursing schoolto enquire about programs to upgrade your education and experience.

In order to facilitate the application process, the College requires all documents submitted by applicants to be in either English or French.

Applicants who receive copies of supporting documents (e.g., transcripts or verification letters) in a language other than English or French are responsible for arranging the translation of those documents into English or French before their application can be assessed. (More on the translation process)

For a list of accredited translators, contact theAssociation of Translators and Interpreters of Ontarioat 1 800-234-5030 (613 241-2846 in the Ottawa region), or by emailinfo@atio.on.ca.

Please note the College also accepts translations from:

the consulate, high commission or embassy (in Canada) of the country that issued the documentsa Canadian consulate, high commission or embassy in the country from which the documents were sent



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: 
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/learn-about-standards-guidelines/
Title: Standards & Learning

CNO has created a set of practice standards and guidelines that apply to all nurses in Ontario regardless of their role, job description or area of practice.

This section offers resources to help nurses apply the practice standards to their practice, as well as other documents and resources created by CNO for the benefit of nurses, applicants, employers and the general public.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: 
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/myqa/
Title: Quality Assurance Program

CNO's Quality Assurance (QA) Program assures the public of nurses’ commitment to continuing competence by continually improving their nursing practice.

Being self-reflective and committed to life-long learning is a critical part of providing the safest and highest quality care to patients. This is why all nurses engage in daily practice reflection and participate in quality assurance activities throughout their careers.

CNO’s QA Program consists of three components:

QA Everyday (Self-Assessment and Learning Plan)QA AssessmentRemedial support

As professionals, all nurses are accountable to reflect on their practice to determine their learning needs. Nurses also must develop aLearning Planand actively update their knowledge and skills to maintain their continued competence.



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Self-Assessment
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/myqa/self-assessment/
Title: Self-Assessment

QA Everyday involves completing self-assessment in two parts:

Image description

Practice reflectionDeveloping a learning plan



As regulated health professionals, all nurses are accountable to reflect on their practice to determine their learning needs through self-assessment. A thoughtful and purposeful completed annualLearning Planhelps ensure nurses actively update their knowledge and skills to maintain continued competence.

All nurses registered in the General and Extended Classes must complete self-assessment every year. Self-assessment is a self-directed, two-part process that results in a learning plan.

Practice reflection is the intentional process of critically thinking about your practice daily, to identify the strengths and gaps in your practice needing continuous learning.

When reflecting, take time to explore a situation or change in your practice. Think about what you did well and if there are areas for improvement. Considering areas of improvement helps to determine your learning gaps and what you can do to improve or enhance your practice.

CNO recognizes the continued impact the health care system on the nursing profession. A series of practice reflection questions are included below to help you reflect on your experiences and identify areas in your practice for continued learning.

1. How did your experience this year impact your practice?

What experiences stand out to you (for example, changes in practice, new models of care, introduction of additional regulated/unregulated care providers to the team)?Did you take on additional responsibilities?Did you experience any challenges? If so, what were they? How did you manage them?

2. What changed, if anything, in how you do your work?

Provide examples of changes you noted for yourself, others (for example, clients, colleagues, students, the public), your practice setting and the overall health care systemWhy were/are these changes important?How did you adapt to these changes?

3. What learning opportunities did you identify through your experiences that you can apply moving forward?

What did you learn that you will continue to use throughout your practice?

4. Based on your reflection, what areas of your nursing knowledge, skill and judgment can you identify as needing professional development?

How will addressing these areas help you maintain or improve your nursing knowledge, skill or judgment?Which areas in your knowledge, skill and judgment are most important to address and carry forward in your QA this year?

After identifying your learning gaps, you must develop learning goals to improve the areas in your practice needing further development. ALearning Planallows you to write down your goals, describe the activities you plan to complete to achieve your goals and track your learning activities. CNO suggests you develop at least two learning goals to focus on each year.

Your learning plan is evidence of activities you did to help maintain your competence as a nurse. You are expected to update your learning plan regularly and keep it for two years.

Video: How to become a reflective practitionerQuality Assurance: Your Guide to Self-AssessmentCreate your Learning Plan



------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Quality Assurance Assessment
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/myqa/quality-assurance-assessment/
Title: Quality Assurance Assessment

Quality Assurance Assessment promotes nurses’ continuing competence and quality improvement of their practice.

Each year, CNO randomly selects nurses from the General and Extended class to participate in a Quality Assurance (QA) Assessment. If you are selected, you will be notified by email with instructions on how to complete the assessment requirements.

There are two components to QA Assessment:

Part A – Knowledge AssessmentPart B – Practice Assessment

Activities for Part A – Knowledge Assessment include

Completing online learning modulesCompleting knowledge checks

Activities for Part B – Practice Assessment include

Submitting an annual learning planCompleting aCode of Conductpractice activity

NPs selected for Part B also will complete an NP case example with the Learning Plan andCode of Conductpractice activity.

QA Assessment includes optional coaching. Coaching is a supportive way to guide you through your QA Assessment. It gives you an opportunity to work directly with a QA Peer Coach to help you understand your learning needs and improve your future practice.

QA Peer Coaches are nurses trained in coaching principles. They also have in-depth knowledge of CNO's practice standards, guidelines and QA Assessment requirements. They are responsible to review and assess your QA activities, and write a report to theQuality Assurance Committeeabout your submission.

TheQuality Assurance (QA) Committeeis one of CNO’s statutory committees. It is made up of elected council members, public members and nurses CNO appoints.

The QA Committee is responsible for ensuring nurses comply with all aspects of the QA Program, and makes decisions about a nurse’s participation by reviewing the QA Peer Coach’s report.

The QA Program is a supportive program and, at times, nurses require additional support to complete their QA Assessment. If a QA Peer Coach assesses a nurse as unsatisfactory, the nurse may be directed to complete Remedial Support Activities. This QA Program component involves a mandatory meeting with a QA Peer Coach and completing a written practice reflection. At the meeting, the nurse and Peer Coach will discuss the reflection in more detail to ensure the nurse is practicing safely and competently. Once completed, the QA Peer Coach again writes a report for the Quality Assurance Committee.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: QA Resources
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/myqa/qa-resources/
Title: QA Resources

A focus of CNO’s Quality Assurance (QA) program is to encourage nurses to think about their experiences to help identify learning needs and ongoing professional development. The following resources have been developed to support you in reflecting on your practice.

Video: How to become a reflective practitionerYour Guide to Self-assessmentLearning Plan templateLearning Plan samplesNP working in a clinicRPN working in palliative careDirector of Care working in long-term careNew graduate working in an emergency room

SMART Learning Goals

Watch this video and usethe guide to self-assessmentto help you write specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, time-limited (SMART) learning goals for your learning plan.

Are your Learning Goals SMART?(video)

CNO creates practice standards and guidelines to support nurses in providing the public safe, quality care. These documents, including CNO’sCode of Conduct, outline the expectations and accountabilities for nurses. They apply to all nurses, regardless of their role, job description or area of practice. Use these documents as part of your learning activities to enhance your knowledge and help you achieve your learning goals.

Standards and Guidelines

Developed in partnership with nursing regulators across the country, these documents describe what is expected of entry‐level registered nurses and registered practical nurses in order to provide safe and ethical nursing care in a variety of practice settings.

Entry-to-Practice Competencies for Ontario Registered Practical NursesEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Registered NursesEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Nurse PractitionersEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Nurse Practitioners: Not in effect - will takeeffect September 2024

Nurse Practitioners must review theNurse Practitionerpractice standard, theEntry-to-Practice Competencies for Nurse Practitionersand the information in theNP Practice Resourcessection of this website.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: FAQs: Quality Assurance (QA)
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/myqa/faqs-quality-assurance/
Title: FAQs: Quality Assurance (QA)

Nurses maintain and enhance their competence through daily practice reflection, lifelong learning and by integrating that learning into their practice. As practicing nurses, QA is integral in ensuring the public receives safe, quality and ethical care.

TheRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991requires CNO to establish and administer a QA Program that assists nurses in maintaining competence and continually evaluating their practice.

CNO’s QA Program consists of three components:

All nurses are expected to participate in QA by reflecting daily on their practice and participating in learning activities to maintain their continuing competence.

CNO selects a random number of nurses at various times throughout the year to complete QA Assessment. More information can be found on ourQuality Assurance Assessment webpage.

Reflective questions can be found in the Practice Reflection section on ourQA Everyday webpage.

Yes. Reflection can take place in a group setting. Group reflection provides opportunities to learn from each other, identify common goals and inform your own assessment.

Yes. All components of QA require a Learning Plan. It is your accountability under theRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991to complete a Learning Plan every year. You can do this however you choose. Some nurses useCNO’s Learning Plan template, while other nurses prefer using a notebook to record their plans for the year. CNO requires the Learning Plan identifytwo learning goals. If you are selected for QA Assessment, you will be required to submit your learning plan to CNO. You should keep a copy of your Learning Plan for two years.

As reflective practitioners, nurses reflect on their practice every day, to identify opportunities for continuous improvement and support professional learning and growth.

Yes. All nurses registered in the General or Extended Class are expected to participate in QA activities, except for nurses in the Non-Practising Class. For more information about the Non-Practising Class, visit theRegistration Classessection of this website.

Even if you are not currently working, you can still reflect on your nursing practice experiences to determine your strengths, areas for improvement and learning needs. These experiences can include previous formal employment, or student placements if you are a new graduate.

You can also reflect on relevant new information and think about how it might influence your practice. For example, is there new evidence or legislation that may change how you would deliver care?

Part of practice reflection is getting feedback from peers. You can get peer feedback from a colleague who is familiar with your recent nursing roles, or include feedback from a previous clinical evaluation.

Once you have identified your learning needs from this reflection, you can plan your learning goals, and the activities you need to do to achieve them in your learning plan.

Updates to CNO’s QA program will be available on our website. We also will notify you of any changes inThe Standard, and on ourFacebook,X (formerly Twitter),LinkedInandInstagrampages.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Information for the public
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/myqa/qa-public-information/
Title: Quality Assurance: A commitment to safe, quality care

Patient safety is at the heart of nursing. As the nursing regulator in Ontario, CNO’s role is to make sure nurses are maintaining their knowledge and skills throughout their careers so the public receives safe, quality nursing care. One way we do this is through our quality assurance program.

TheRegulated Health Professions Act, 1991requires that all health care regulators in Ontario establish and administer a quality assurance (QA) Program.

QA is a process where nurses are required to reflect on their practice, identify gaps in their knowledge and take action to fill those gaps. CNO supports this process by providing tools and resources to assist nurses in completing their annual QA requirements.

QA is important because it keeps nurses accountable in making sure they are staying up to date with the evolving health care environment, for instance, changes in nursing scope of practice, increasing client care needs, and advances in health care technology.

Nurses must declare they engage in QA activities every year when renewing their CNO membership. When nurses complete their QA requirements, they demonstrate to the public their commitment to lifelong learning and continued competence. The public can have confidence in the nursing profession and be assured that nurses are providing safe, quality care.

All practicing nurses are accountable, under legislation, to self-assess their nursing practice every year. This includes reflecting on current practice, identifying learning needs, and completing a learning plan which clearly outlines activities to improve competence. We call this QA Everyday.

Each year, CNO randomly selects nurses for QA Assessment. There are two parts to QA Assessment: Part A: Knowledge Assessment and Part B: Practice Assessment. In Part A, nurses complete a set of learning modules about nursing practice and complete a knowledge check. In Part B, nurses are to submit their Learning Plan and other activities for review. Once submitted, a CNO trained QA Peer Coach reviews the submission and provides feedback. Nurses will have an opportunity to work individually with the QA Peer Coach to understand and apply their feedback to improve future practice, including strengthening their understanding and application of theCode of Conduct.

If a nurse chooses not to participate or does not demonstrate adequate knowledge skill and judgment, they may be directed by CNO’sQA Committeeto complete additional activities.

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: Contact us
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/myqa/contact-us2/
Title: Questions



Do you have a question about the Quality Assurance program? We are here to help.

If you have questions about theQA Assessment process, you can reach out to the QA Program atQAassessment@CNOmail.org, 416-963-3922, or 1-800-387-5526 (ext. 3922).

------------------------------------------------------------

Page: 
URL: https://www.cno.org/en/maintain-your-membership1/
Title: Maintain Your Membership



Login to my account

Apply to become registered with the College. Read FAQs on theApplying to the College onlinepage.Access your renewal receiptsUpdate your contact informationConsent to releasing your home mailing address to outside partiesChoose your preferred language of communication with the CollegeReport a nursing registration in another jurisdictionReport a licence or registration in another profession in any jurisdictionReport hospital privileges (NPs only)

------------------------------------------------------------

